prelud.who that care much to know the histori of man, and how the mysteriousmixtur behav under the vari experi of time, ha not dwelt,at least briefli, on the life of saint theresa, ha not smile withsom gentl at the thought of the littl girl walk forth onemorn hand-in-hand with her still smaller brother, to go and seekmartyrdom in the countri of the moor? out thei toddl from ruggedavila, wide-ei and helpless-look as two fawn, but with humanheart, alreadi beat to a nation idea; until domest realiti metthem in the shape of uncl, and turn them back from their greatresolv. that child-pilgrimag wa a fit begin. theresa’spassion, ideal natur demand an epic life: what were mani-volumedrom of chivalri and the social conquest of a brilliant girl toher? her flame quickli burn up that light fuel; and, fed from within,soar after some illimit satisfact, some object which wouldnev justifi weari, which would reconcil self-despair with theraptur conscious of life beyond self. she found her epo in thereform of a religi order.that spanish woman who live three hundr year ago, wa certainli notth last of her kind. mani theresa have been born who found forthemselv no epic life wherein there wa a constant unfold offar-reson action; perhap onli a life of mistak, the offspr ofa certain spiritu grandeur ill-match with the mean ofopportun; perhap a tragic failur which found no sacr poet andsank unwept into oblivion. with dim light and tangl circumstancethei tri to shape their thought and deed in nobl agreement; butaft all, to common ey their struggl seem mere inconsist andformless; for these later-born theresa were help by no coherentsoci faith and order which could perform the function of knowledgefor the ardent will soul. their ardor altern between a vagueid and the common yearn of womanhood; so that the on wasdisapprov as extravag, and the other condemn as a laps.some have felt that these blunder live ar due to the inconvenientindefinit with which the suprem power ha fashion the naturesof women: if there were on level of feminin incompet as strict asth abil to count three and no more, the social lot of women mightb treat with scientif certitud. meanwhil the indefinitenessremain, and the limit of variat ar realli much wider than ani onewould imagin from the same of women’s coiffur and the favoritelov-stori in prose and vers. here and there a cygnet is reareduneasili among the duckl in the brown pond, and never find theliv stream in fellowship with it own oari-foot kind. here andther is born a saint theresa, foundress of noth, whose lovingheart-beat and sob after an unattain good trembl off and aredispers among hindranc, instead of centr in somelong-recogniz deed.book i.miss brook.chapter i.sinc i can do no good becaus a woman,reach constantli at someth that is near it. —_the maid’s tragedi:_ beaumont and fletcher.miss brook had that kind of beauti which seem to be thrown intorelief by poor dress. her hand and wrist were so fine form that shecould wear sleev not less bare of style than those in which thebless virgin appear to italian painter; and her profil as well asher statur and bear seem to gain the more digniti from her plaingar, which by the side of provinci fashion gave her theimpress of a fine quotat from the bibl,—or from on of oureld poet,—in a paragraph of to-dai’s newspap. she wa usuallyspoken of as be remark clever, but with the addit that hersist celia had more common-sens. nevertheless, celia wore scarcelymor trim; and it wa onli to close observ that her dressdiff from her sister’s, and had a shade of coquetri in itsarrang; for miss brook’s plain dress wa due to mixedcondit, in most of which her sister share. the pride of beingladi had someth to do with it: the brook connect, though notexactli aristocrat, were unquestion “good:” if you inquiredbackward for a gener or two, you would not find ani yard-measuringor parcel-ty forefath—anyth lower than an admir or aclergyman; and there wa even an ancestor discern as a puritangentleman who serv under cromwel, but afterward conform, andmanag to come out of all polit troubl as the proprietor of arespect famili estat. young women of such birth, live in a quietcountri-hous, and attend a villag church hardli larger than aparlor, natur regard fripperi as the ambit of a huckster’sdaughter. then there wa well-bred economi, which in those dai madeshow in dress the first item to be deduct from, when ani margin wasrequir for expens more distinct of rank. such reason would havebeen enough to account for plain dress, quit apart from religiousfeel; but in miss brook’s case, religion alon would havedetermin it; and celia mildli acquiesc in all her sister’ssentiment, onli infus them with that common-sens which is abl toaccept moment doctrin without ani eccentr agit. dorotheaknew mani passag of pascal’s pense and of jeremi taylor by heart;and to her the destini of mankind, seen by the light of christian,made the solicitud of feminin fashion appear an occup forbedlam. she could not reconcil the anxieti of a spiritu lifeinvolv etern consequ, with a keen interest in gimp andartifici protrus of draperi. her mind wa theoret, and yearnedbi it natur after some lofti concept of the world which mightfrankli includ the parish of tipton and her own rule of conduct there;she wa enamour of intens and great, and rash in embracingwhatev seem to her to have those aspect; like to seek martyrdom,to make retract, and then to incur martyrdom after all in aquart where she had not sought it. certainli such element in thecharact of a marriag girl tend to interfer with her lot, andhind it from be decid accord to custom, by good look,vaniti, and mere canin affect. with all thi, she, the elder ofth sister, wa not yet twenti, and thei had both been educ, sincethei were about twelv year old and had lost their parent, on plansat onc narrow and promiscu, first in an english famili andafterward in a swiss famili at lausann, their bachelor uncl andguardian try in thi wai to remedi the disadvantag of theirorphan condit.it wa hardli a year sinc thei had come to live at tipton grang withtheir uncl, a man nearli sixti, of acquiesc temper, miscellaneousopinion, and uncertain vote. he had travel in hi younger year,and wa held in thi part of the counti to have contract a toorambl habit of mind. mr. brook’s conclus were as difficult topredict as the weather: it wa onli safe to sai that he would act withbenevol intent, and that he would spend as littl monei asposs in carri them out. for the most glutin indefinitemind enclos some hard grain of habit; and a man ha been seen laxabout all hi own interest except the retent of hi snuff-box,concern which he wa watch, suspici, and greedi of clutch.in mr. brook the hereditari strain of puritan energi wa clearli inabey; but in hi niec dorothea it glow alik through fault andvirtu, turn sometim into impati of her uncl’s talk or hiswai of “let thing be” on hi estat, and make her long all themor for the time when she would be of ag and have some command ofmonei for gener scheme. she wa regard as an heiress; for notonli had the sister seven hundr a-year each from their parent, butif dorothea marri and had a son, that son would inherit mr. brook’sestat, presum worth about three thousand a-year—a rental whichseem wealth to provinci famili, still discuss mr. peel’s lateconduct on the cathol question, innoc of futur gold-field, andof that gorgeou plutocraci which ha so nobli exalt the necessitiesof genteel life.and how should dorothea not marri?—a girl so handsom and with suchprospect? noth could hinder it but her love of extrem, and herinsist on regul life accord to notion which might caus awari man to hesit befor he made her an offer, or even might leadher at last to refus all offer. a young ladi of some birth andfortun, who knelt suddenli down on a brick floor by the side of a sicklabor and prai fervidli as if she thought herself live in thetim of the apostl—who had strang whim of fast like a papist,and of sit up at night to read old theolog book! such a wifemight awaken you some fine morn with a new scheme for theapplic of her incom which would interfer with polit economyand the keep of saddl-hors: a man would natur think twicebefor he risk himself in such fellowship. women were expect tohav weak opinion; but the great safeguard of societi and of domesticlif wa, that opinion were not act on. sane peopl did what theirneighbor did, so that if ani lunat were at larg, on might knowand avoid them.the rural opinion about the new young ladi, even among the cottag,wa gener in favor of celia, as be so amiabl andinnoc-look, while miss brook’s larg ey seem, like herreligion, too unusu and strike. poor dorothea! compar with her,the innoc-look celia wa know and worldli-wise; so muchsubtl is a human mind than the outsid tissu which make a sort ofblazonri or clock-face for it.yet those who approach dorothea, though prejud against her bythi alarm hearsai, found that she had a charm unaccountablyreconcil with it. most men thought her bewitch when she wa onhorseback. she love the fresh air and the variou aspect of thecountri, and when her ey and cheek glow with mingl pleasur shelook veri littl like a devote. ride wa an indulg which sheallow herself in spite of conscienti qualm; she felt that sheenjoi it in a pagan sensuou wai, and alwai look forward torenounc it.she wa open, ardent, and not in the least self-admir; inde, itwa pretti to see how her imagin adorn her sister celia withattract altogeth superior to her own, and if ani gentlemanappear to come to the grang from some other motiv than that ofse mr. brook, she conclud that he must be in love with celia:sir jame chettam, for exampl, whom she constantli consid fromcelia’s point of view, inwardli debat whether it would be good forcelia to accept him. that he should be regard as a suitor to herselfwould have seem to her a ridicul irrelev. dorothea, with allher eager to know the truth of life, retain veri childlik ideasabout marriag. she felt sure that she would have accept thejudici hooker, if she had been born in time to save him from thatwretch mistak he made in matrimoni; or john milton when hisblind had come on; or ani of the other great men whose odd habitsit would have been gloriou pieti to endur; but an amiabl handsomebaronet, who said “exactli” to her remark even when she expresseduncertainti,—how could he affect her as a lover? the realli delightfulmarriag must be that where your husband wa a sort of father, andcould teach you even hebrew, if you wish it.these peculiar of dorothea’s charact caus mr. brook to be allth more blame in neighbor famili for not secur somemiddl-ag ladi as guid and companion to hi niec. but he himselfdread so much the sort of superior woman like to be avail forsuch a posit, that he allow himself to be dissuad by dorothea’sobject, and wa in thi case brave enough to defi the world—that isto sai, mr. cadwallad the rector’s wife, and the small group ofgentri with whom he visit in the northeast corner of loamshir. somiss brook presid in her uncl’s household, and did not at alldislik her new author, with the homag that belong to it.sir jame chettam wa go to dine at the grang to-dai with anothergentleman whom the girl had never seen, and about whom dorothea feltsom vener expect. thi wa the reverend edward casaubon,note in the counti as a man of profound learn, understood for manyyear to be engag on a great work concern religi histori; alsoa a man of wealth enough to give lustr to hi pieti, and have viewsof hi own which were to be more clearli ascertain on the publicationof hi book. hi veri name carri an impress hardli to bemeasur without a precis chronolog of scholarship.earli in the dai dorothea had return from the infant school which shehad set go in the villag, and wa take her usual place in thepretti sit-room which divid the bedroom of the sister, bent onfinish a plan for some build (a kind of work which she delightedin), when celia, who had been watch her with a hesit desir topropos someth, said—“dorothea, dear, if you don’t mind—if you ar not veri busi—suppos welook at mamma’s jewel to-dai, and divid them? it is exactli sixmonth to-dai sinc uncl gave them to you, and you have not look atthem yet.”celia’s face had the shadow of a pout express in it, the fullpres of the pout be kept back by an habitu aw of dorothea andprincipl; two associ fact which might show a mysteriouselectr if you touch them incauti. to her relief, dorothea’sey were full of laughter as she look up.“what a wonder littl almanac you ar, celia! is it six calendar orsix lunar month?”“it is the last dai of septemb now, and it wa the first of aprilwhen uncl gave them to you. you know, he said that he had forgottenthem till then. i believ you have never thought of them sinc youlock them up in the cabinet here.”“well, dear, we should never wear them, you know.” dorothea spoke in aful cordial tone, half caress, half explanatori. she had her pencilin her hand, and wa make tini side-plan on a margin.celia color, and look veri grave. “i think, dear, we ar want inrespect to mamma’s memori, to put them by and take no notic of them.and,” she ad, after hesit a littl, with a rise sob ofmortif, “necklac ar quit usual now; and madam poincon, whowa stricter in some thing even than you ar, us to wear ornament.and christian gener—sure there ar women in heaven now who worejewel.” celia wa consciou of some mental strength when she reallyappli herself to argument.“you would like to wear them?” exclaim dorothea, an air of astonisheddiscoveri anim her whole person with a dramat action which shehad caught from that veri madam poincon who wore the ornament. “ofcours, then, let us have them out. why did you not tell me befor? butth kei, the kei!” she press her hand against the side of herhead and seem to despair of her memori.“thei ar here,” said celia, with whom thi explan had been longmedit and prearrang.“prai open the larg drawer of the cabinet and get out the jewel-box.”the casket wa soon open befor them, and the variou jewel spreadout, make a bright parterr on the tabl. it wa no great collect,but a few of the ornament were realli of remark beauti, the finestthat wa obviou at first be a necklac of purpl amethyst set inexquisit gold work, and a pearl cross with five brilliant in it.dorothea immedi took up the necklac and fasten it round hersist’s neck, where it fit almost as close as a bracelet; but thecircl suit the henrietta-maria style of celia’s head and neck, andsh could see that it did, in the pier-glass opposit.“there, celia! you can wear that with your indian muslin. but thiscross you must wear with your dark dress.”celia wa try not to smile with pleasur. “o dodo, you must keep thecross yourself.”“no, no, dear, no,” said dorothea, put up her hand with carelessdeprec.“ye, inde you must; it would suit you—in your black dress, now,”said celia, insistingli. “you _might_ wear that.”“not for the world, not for the world. a cross is the last thing iwould wear as a trinket.” dorothea shudder slightli.“then you will think it wick in me to wear it,” said celia, uneasili.“no, dear, no,” said dorothea, stroke her sister’s cheek. “soul havecomplexion too: what will suit on will not suit anoth.”“but you might like to keep it for mamma’s sake.”“no, i have other thing of mamma’s—her sandal-wood box which i am sofond of—plenti of thing. in fact, thei ar all your, dear. we needdiscuss them no longer. there—take awai your properti.”celia felt a littl hurt. there wa a strong assumpt of superiorityin thi puritan toler, hardli less try to the blond flesh ofan unenthusiast sister than a puritan persecut.“but how can i wear ornament if you, who ar the elder sister, willnev wear them?”“nai, celia, that is too much to ask, that i should wear trinket tokeep you in counten. if i were to put on such a necklac as that, ishould feel as if i had been pirouet. the world would go round withm, and i should not know how to walk.”celia had unclasp the necklac and drawn it off. “it would be alittl tight for your neck; someth to lie down and hang would suityou better,” she said, with some satisfact. the complet unfitnessof the necklac from all point of view for dorothea, made celiahappi in take it. she wa open some ring-box, which discloseda fine emerald with diamond, and just then the sun pass beyond acloud sent a bright gleam over the tabl.“how veri beauti these gem ar!” said dorothea, under a new currentof feel, as sudden as the gleam. “it is strang how deepli colorsseem to penetr on, like scent. i suppos that is the reason whygem ar us as spiritu emblem in the revel of st. john. theylook like fragment of heaven. i think that emerald is more beautifulthan ani of them.”“and there is a bracelet to match it,” said celia. “we did not noticethi at first.”“thei ar love,” said dorothea, slip the ring and bracelet on herfin turn finger and wrist, and hold them toward the window ona level with her ey. all the while her thought wa try to justifyh delight in the color by merg them in her mystic religi joi.“you _would_ like those, dorothea,” said celia, rather falteringli,begin to think with wonder that her sister show some weak,and also that emerald would suit her own complexion even better thanpurpl amethyst. “you must keep that ring and bracelet—if nothingels. but see, these agat ar veri pretti and quiet.”“ye! i will keep these—thi ring and bracelet,” said dorothea. then,let her hand fall on the tabl, she said in anoth tone—“yet whatmiser men find such thing, and work at them, and sell them!” shepaus again, and celia thought that her sister wa go to renounceth ornament, as in consist she ought to do.“ye, dear, i will keep these,” said dorothea, decidedli. “but take allth rest awai, and the casket.”she took up her pencil without remov the jewel, and still lookingat them. she thought of often have them by her, to feed her ey atthes littl fountain of pure color.“shall you wear them in compani?” said celia, who wa watch her withreal curios as to what she would do.dorothea glanc quickli at her sister. across all her imaginativeadorn of those whom she love, there dart now and then a keendiscern, which wa not without a scorch qualiti. if miss brookeev attain perfect meek, it would not be for lack of inwardfir.“perhap,” she said, rather haughtili. “i cannot tell to what level imai sink.”celia blush, and wa unhappi: she saw that she had offend hersist, and dare not sai even anyth pretti about the gift of theornament which she put back into the box and carri awai. dorotheatoo wa unhappi, as she went on with her plan-draw, question thepur of her own feel and speech in the scene which had end withthat littl explos.celia’s conscious told her that she had not been at all in thewrong: it wa quit natur and justifi that she should have askedthat question, and she repeat to herself that dorothea wasinconsist: either she should have taken her full share of thejewel, or, after what she had said, she should have renounc themaltogeth.“i am sure—at least, i trust,” thought celia, “that the wear of anecklac will not interfer with my prayer. and i do not see that ishould be bound by dorothea’s opinion now we ar go into societi,though of cours she herself ought to be bound by them. but dorothea isnot alwai consist.”thu celia, mute bend over her tapestri, until she heard hersist call her.“here, kitti, come and look at my plan; i shall think i am a greatarchitect, if i have not got incompat stair and fireplac.”as celia bent over the paper, dorothea put her cheek against hersist’s arm caressingli. celia understood the action. dorothea sawthat she had been in the wrong, and celia pardon her. sinc theycould rememb, there had been a mixtur of critic and aw in theattitud of celia’s mind toward her elder sister. the younger hadalwai worn a yoke; but is there ani yoke creatur without it privateopinion?chapter ii.“‘dime; no ve aquel caballero que hacia nosotro vien sobr uncaballo rucio rodado que trae puesto en la cabeza un yelmo de oro?’ ‘loqu veo y columbro,’ respondio sancho, ‘no es sino un hombr sobr una no pardo como el mio, que trae sobr la cabeza una cosa querelumbra.’ ‘pue es es el yelmo de mambrino,’ dijo donquijot.”—cervant.“‘seest thou not yon cavali who cometh toward us on a dappl-grayste, and weareth a golden helmet?’ ‘what i see,’ answer sancho, ‘isnoth but a man on a grai ass like my own, who carri somethingshini on hi head.’ ‘just so,’ answer don quixot: ‘and thatresplend object is the helmet of mambrino.’”“sir humphri davi?” said mr. brook, over the soup, in hi easi smilingwai, take up sir jame chettam’s remark that he wa studi davi’sagricultur chemistri. “well, now, sir humphri davi; i dine with himyear ago at cartwright’s, and wordsworth wa there too—the poetwordsworth, you know. now there wa someth singular. i wa atcambridg when wordsworth wa there, and i never met him—and i dinedwith him twenti year afterward at cartwright’s. there’s an odditi inth, now. but davi wa there: he wa a poet too. or, as i mai sai,wordsworth wa poet on, and davi wa poet two. that wa true in everysens, you know.”dorothea felt a littl more uneasi than usual. in the begin ofdinn, the parti be small and the room still, these mote from themass of a magistr’s mind fell too notic. she wonder how a manlik mr. casaubon would support such trivial. hi manner, shethought, were veri dignifi; the set of hi iron-grai hair and hisdeep ey-socket made him resembl the portrait of lock. he had thespar form and the pale complexion which becam a student; as differenta possibl from the bloom englishman of the red-whisker typerepres by sir jame chettam.“i am read the agricultur chemistri,” said thi excel baronet,“becaus i am go to take on of the farm into my own hand, and seeif someth cannot be done in set a good pattern of farm amongmi tenant. do you approv of that, miss brook?”“a great mistak, chettam,” interpos mr. brook, “go intoelectrifi your land and that kind of thing, and make a parlor ofyour cow-hous. it won’t do. i went into scienc a great deal myself aton time; but i saw it would not do. it lead to everyth; you canlet noth alon. no, no—see that your tenant don’t sell their straw,and that kind of thing; and give them drain-tile, you know. butyour fanci farm will not do—the most expens sort of whistl youcan bui: you mai as well keep a pack of hound.”“sure,” said dorothea, “it is better to spend monei in find outhow men can make the most of the land which support them all, than inkeep dog and hors onli to gallop over it. it is not a sin to makeyourself poor in perform experi for the good of all.”she spoke with more energi than is expect of so young a ladi, but sirjam had appeal to her. he wa accustom to do so, and she hadoften thought that she could urg him to mani good action when he washer brother-in-law.mr. casaubon turn hi ey veri markedli on dorothea while she wasspeak, and seem to observ her newli.“young ladi don’t understand polit economi, you know,” said mr.brook, smile toward mr. casaubon. “i rememb when we were allread adam smith. _there_ is a book, now. i took in all the new ideasat on time—human perfect, now. but some sai, histori move incircl; and that mai be veri well argu; i have argu it myself. thefact is, human reason mai carri you a littl too far—over the hedg, infact. it carri me a good wai at on time; but i saw it would not do.i pull up; i pull up in time. but not too hard. i have alwai beenin favor of a littl theori: we must have thought; els we shall beland back in the dark ag. but talk of book, there is southei’s‘peninsular war.’ i am read that of a morn. you know southei?”“no,” said mr. casaubon, not keep pace with mr. brook’s impetuousreason, and think of the book onli. “i have littl leisur for suchliteratur just now. i have been us up my eyesight on old charactersl; the fact is, i want a reader for my even; but i amfastidi in voic, and i cannot endur listen to an imperfectread. it is a misfortun, in some sens: i feed too much on theinward sourc; i live too much with the dead. my mind is somethinglik the ghost of an ancient, wander about the world and tryingment to construct it as it us to be, in spite of ruin andconfus chang. but i find it necessari to us the utmost cautionabout my eyesight.”thi wa the first time that mr. casaubon had spoken at ani length. hedeliv himself with precis, as if he had been call upon to makea public statement; and the balanc sing-song neat of hi speech,occasion correspond to by a movement of hi head, wa the moreconspicu from it contrast with good mr. brook’s scrappyslovenli. dorothea said to herself that mr. casaubon wa the mostinterest man she had ever seen, not except even monsieur liret,the vaudoi clergyman who had given confer on the histori of thewaldens. to reconstruct a past world, doubtless with a view to thehighest purpos of truth—what a work to be in ani wai present at, toassist in, though onli as a lamp-holder! thi elev thought liftedh abov her annoy at be twit with her ignor ofpolit economi, that never-explain scienc which wa thrust as anextinguish over all her light.“but you ar fond of ride, miss brook,” sir jame present took anopportun of sai. “i should have thought you would enter a littleinto the pleasur of hunt. i wish you would let me send over achestnut hors for you to try. it ha been train for a ladi. i sawyou on saturdai canter over the hill on a nag not worthi of you. mygroom shall bring corydon for you everi dai, if you will onli mentionth time.”“thank you, you ar veri good. i mean to give up ride. i shall notrid ani more,” said dorothea, urg to thi brusqu resolut by alittl annoy that sir jame would be solicit her attent whensh want to give it all to mr. casaubon.“no, that is too hard,” said sir jame, in a tone of reproach thatshow strong interest. “your sister is given to self-mortif, issh not?” he continu, turn to celia, who sat at hi right hand.“i think she is,” said celia, feel afraid lest she should saysometh that would not pleas her sister, and blush as prettili asposs abov her necklac. “she like give up.”“if that were true, celia, my give-up would be self-indulg, notself-mortif. but there mai be good reason for choos not todo what is veri agreeabl,” said dorothea.mr. brook wa speak at the same time, but it wa evid that mr.casaubon wa observ dorothea, and she wa awar of it.“exactli,” said sir jame. “you give up from some high, generousmot.”“no, inde, not exactli. i did not sai that of myself,” answereddorothea, redden. unlik celia, she rare blush, and onli fromhigh delight or anger. at thi moment she felt angri with the perversesir jame. why did he not pai attent to celia, and leav her tolisten to mr. casaubon?—if that learn man would onli talk, instead ofallow himself to be talk to by mr. brook, who wa just theninform him that the reform either meant someth or it didnot, that he himself wa a protest to the core, but that catholicismwa a fact; and as to refus an acr of your ground for a romanistchapel, all men need the bridl of religion, which, properlyspeak, wa the dread of a hereaft.“i made a great studi of theologi at on time,” said mr. brook, as ifto explain the insight just manifest. “i know someth of allschool. i knew wilberforc in hi best dai. do you know wilberforc?”mr. casaubon said, “no.”“well, wilberforc wa perhap not enough of a thinker; but if i wentinto parliament, as i have been ask to do, i should sit on theindepend bench, as wilberforc did, and work at philanthropi.”mr. casaubon bow, and observ that it wa a wide field.“ye,” said mr. brook, with an easi smile, “but i have document. ibegan a long while ago to collect document. thei want arrang, butwhen a question ha struck me, i have written to somebodi and got anansw. i have document at my back. but now, how do you arrang yourdocu?”“in pigeon-hole partli,” said mr. casaubon, with rather a startl airof effort.“ah, pigeon-hole will not do. i have tri pigeon-hole, buteveryth get mix in pigeon-hole: i never know whether a paper isin a or z.”“i wish you would let me sort your paper for you, uncl,” saiddorothea. “i would letter them all, and then make a list of subjectsund each letter.”mr. casaubon grave smile approv, and said to mr. brook, “you havean excel secretari at hand, you perceiv.”“no, no,” said mr. brook, shake hi head; “i cannot let young ladiesmeddl with my document. young ladi ar too flighti.”dorothea felt hurt. mr. casaubon would think that her uncl had somespeci reason for deliv thi opinion, wherea the remark lai inhi mind as lightli as the broken wing of an insect among all the otherfrag there, and a chanc current had sent it alight on _her_.when the two girl were in the draw-room alon, celia said—“how veri ugli mr. casaubon is!”“celia! he is on of the most distinguish-look men i ever saw. hei remark like the portrait of lock. he ha the same deepey-socket.”“had lock those two white mole with hair on them?”“oh, i dare sai! when peopl of a certain sort look at him,” saiddorothea, walk awai a littl.“mr. casaubon is so sallow.”“all the better. i suppos you admir a man with the complexion of a_cochon de lait_.”“dodo!” exclaim celia, look after her in surpris. “i never heardyou make such a comparison befor.”“why should i make it befor the occas came? it is a goodcomparison: the match is perfect.”miss brook wa clearli forget herself, and celia thought so.“i wonder you show temper, dorothea.”“it is so pain in you, celia, that you will look at human be asif thei were mere anim with a toilet, and never see the great soulin a man’s face.”“ha mr. casaubon a great soul?” celia wa not without a touch of naivemalic.“ye, i believ he ha,” said dorothea, with the full voic ofdecis. “everyth i see in him correspond to hi pamphlet onbibl cosmolog.”“he talk veri littl,” said celia“there is no on for him to talk to.”celia thought privat, “dorothea quit despis sir jame chettam; ibeliev she would not accept him.” celia felt that thi wa a piti. shehad never been deceiv as to the object of the baronet’s interest.sometim, inde, she had reflect that dodo would perhap not make ahusband happi who had not her wai of look at thing; and stifl inth depth of her heart wa the feel that her sister wa tooreligi for famili comfort. notion and scrupl were like spiltneedl, make on afraid of tread, or sit down, or even.when miss brook wa at the tea-tabl, sir jame came to sit down byher, not have felt her mode of answer him at all offens. whyshould he? he thought it probabl that miss brook like him, andmann must be veri mark inde befor thei ceas to be interpretedbi preconcept either confid or distrust. she wa thoroughlycharm to him, but of cours he theoriz a littl about hisattach. he wa made of excel human dough, and had the raremerit of know that hi talent, even if let loos, would not set thesmallest stream in the counti on fire: henc he like the prospect of awif to whom he could sai, “what shall we do?” about thi or that; whocould help her husband out with reason, and would also have theproperti qualif for do so. as to the excess religiousnessalleg against miss brook, he had a veri indefinit notion of what itconsist in, and thought that it would die out with marriag. inshort, he felt himself to be in love in the right place, and wa readyto endur a great deal of predomin, which, after all, a man couldalwai put down when he like. sir jame had no idea that he shouldev like to put down the predomin of thi handsom girl, in whoseclev he delight. why not? a man’s mind—what there is of it—hasalwai the advantag of be masculin,—as the smallest birch-tree isof a higher kind than the most soar palm,—and even hi ignor isof a sounder qualiti. sir jame might not have origin thisestim; but a kind provid furnish the limpest person witha littl gum or starch in the form of tradit.“let me hope that you will rescind that resolut about the hors,miss brook,” said the persev admir. “i assur you, ride isth most healthi of exercis.”“i am awar of it,” said dorothea, coldli. “i think it would do celiagood—if she would take to it.”“but you ar such a perfect horsewoman.”“excus me; i have had veri littl practic, and i should be easilythrown.”“then that is a reason for more practic. everi ladi ought to be aperfect horsewoman, that she mai accompani her husband.”“you see how wide we differ, sir jame. i have made up my mind that iought not to be a perfect horsewoman, and so i should never correspondto your pattern of a ladi.” dorothea look straight befor her, andspok with cold brusqueri, veri much with the air of a handsom boi,in amus contrast with the solicit amiabl of her admir.“i should like to know your reason for thi cruel resolut. it isnot possibl that you should think horsemanship wrong.”“it is quit possibl that i should think it wrong for me.”“oh, why?” said sir jame, in a tender tone of remonstr.mr. casaubon had come up to the tabl, teacup in hand, and waslisten.“we must not inquir too curious into motiv,” he interpos, in hismeasur wai. “miss brook know that thei ar apt to becom feebl inth utter: the aroma is mix with the grosser air. we must keepth germin grain awai from the light.”dorothea color with pleasur, and look up gratefulli to thespeak. here wa a man who could understand the higher inward life,and with whom there could be some spiritu communion; nai, who couldillumin principl with the widest knowledg: a man whose learningalmost amount to a proof of whatev he believ!dorothea’s infer mai seem larg; but realli life could never havegon on at ani period but for thi liber allow of conclus,which ha facilit marriag under the difficulti of civil.ha ani on ever pinch into it pilul small the cobweb ofpr-matrimoni acquaintanceship?“certainli,” said good sir jame. “miss brook shall not be urg totel reason she would rather be silent upon. i am sure her reasonswould do her honor.”he wa not in the least jealou of the interest with which dorothea hadlook up at mr. casaubon: it never occur to him that a girl to whomh wa medit an offer of marriag could care for a dri bookwormtoward fifti, except, inde, in a religi sort of wai, as for aclergyman of some distinct.howev, sinc miss brook had becom engag in a convers withmr. casaubon about the vaudoi clergi, sir jame betook himself tocelia, and talk to her about her sister; spoke of a hous in town,and ask whether miss brook dislik london. awai from her sister,celia talk quit easili, and sir jame said to himself that thesecond miss brook wa certainli veri agreeabl as well as pretti,though not, as some peopl pretend, more clever and sensibl than theelder sister. he felt that he had chosen the on who wa in allrespect the superior; and a man natur like to look forward tohav the best. he would be the veri mawworm of bachelor whopretend not to expect it.chapter iii.“sai, goddess, what ensu, when raphael,the affabl archangel . . . eveth stori heard attent, and wa filledwith admir, and deep muse, to hearof thing so high and strang.”—_paradis lost_, b. vii.if it had realli occur to mr. casaubon to think of miss brook as asuit wife for him, the reason that might induc her to accept himwer alreadi plant in her mind, and by the even of the next dayth reason had bud and bloom. for thei had had a longconvers in the morn, while celia, who did not like the companyof mr. casaubon’s mole and sallow, had escap to the vicarag toplai with the curat’s ill-shod but merri children.dorothea by thi time had look deep into the ungaug reservoir ofmr. casaubon’s mind, see reflect there in vagu labyrinthineextens everi qualiti she herself brought; had open much of her ownexperi to him, and had understood from him the scope of hi greatwork, also of attract labyrinthin extent. for he had been asinstruct as milton’s “affabl archangel;” and with someth of thearchangel manner he told her how he had undertaken to show (whatinde had been attempt befor, but not with that thorough,justic of comparison, and effect of arrang at which mr.casaubon aim) that all the mythic system or errat mythicalfrag in the world were corrupt of a tradit originallyrev. have onc master the true posit and taken a firmfoot there, the vast field of mythic construct becameintellig, nai, lumin with the reflect light ofcorrespond. but to gather in thi great harvest of truth wa nolight or speedi work. hi note alreadi made a formid rang ofvolum, but the crown task would be to condens these voluminousstil-accumul result and bring them, like the earlier vintag ofhippocrat book, to fit a littl shelf. in explain thi todorothea, mr. casaubon express himself nearli as he would have doneto a fellow-student, for he had not two style of talk at command:it is true that when he us a greek or latin phrase he alwai gave theenglish with scrupul care, but he would probabl have done thi inani case. a learn provinci clergyman is accustom to think of hisacquaint as of “lord, knyght, and other nobl and worthi men,that conn latyn but lytil.”dorothea wa altogeth captiv by the wide embrac of thisconcept. here wa someth beyond the shallow of ladi’ schoolliteratur: here wa a live bossuet, whose work would reconcilecomplet knowledg with devot pieti; here wa a modern augustin whounit the glori of doctor and saint.the sanctiti seem no less clearli mark than the learn, for whendorothea wa impel to open her mind on certain theme which shecould speak of to no on whom she had befor seen at tipton, especiallyon the secondari import of ecclesiast form and articl ofbelief compar with that spiritu religion, that submerg of selfin communion with divin perfect which seem to her to be expressedin the best christian book of wide distant ag, she found in mr.casaubon a listen who understood her at onc, who could assur her ofhi own agreement with that view when duli temper with wiseconform, and could mention histor exampl befor unknown toher.“he think with me,” said dorothea to herself, “or rather, he think awhol world of which my thought is but a poor twopenni mirror. and hisfeel too, hi whole experi—what a lake compar with my littlepool!”miss brook argu from word and disposit not less unhesitatinglythan other young ladi of her ag. sign ar small measur thing,but interpret ar illimit, and in girl of sweet, ardentnatur, everi sign is apt to conjur up wonder, hope, belief, vast as aski, and color by a diffus thimbl of matter in the shape ofknowledg. thei ar not alwai too grossli deceiv; for sinbad himselfmai have fallen by good-luck on a true descript, and wrong reasoningsometim land poor mortal in right conclus: start a long wayoff the true point, and proceed by loop and zigzag, we now andthen arriv just where we ought to be. becaus miss brook wa hasti inher trust, it is not therefor clear that mr. casaubon wa unworthi ofit.he stai a littl longer than he had intend, on a slight pressur ofinvit from mr. brook, who offer no bait except hi owndocu on machin-break and rick-burn. mr. casaubon wa calledinto the librari to look at these in a heap, while hi host pick upfirst on and then the other to read aloud from in a skip anduncertain wai, pass from on unfinish passag to anoth with a“ye, now, but here!” and final push them all asid to open thejourn of hi youth continent travel.“look here—here is all about greec. rhamnu, the ruin of rhamnu—youar a great grecian, now. i don’t know whether you have given muchstudi to the topographi. i spent no end of time in make out theseth—helicon, now. here, now!—‘we start the next morn forparnassu, the doubl-peak parnassu.’ all thi volum is aboutgreec, you know,” mr. brook wound up, rub hi thumb transverselyalong the edg of the leav as he held the book forward.mr. casaubon made a dignifi though somewhat sad audienc; bow inth right place, and avoid look at anyth documentari as far asposs, without show disregard or impati; mind that thisdesultori wa associ with the institut of the countri, andthat the man who took him on thi sever mental scamper wa not onli anami host, but a landhold and custo rotulorum. wa hi enduranceaid also by the reflect that mr. brook wa the uncl of dorothea?certainli he seem more and more bent on make her talk to him, ondraw her out, as celia remark to herself; and in look at herhi face wa often lit up by a smile like pale wintri sunshin. beforeh left the next morn, while take a pleasant walk with miss brookealong the gravel terrac, he had mention to her that he felt thedisadvantag of loneli, the need of that cheer companionshipwith which the presenc of youth can lighten or vari the seriou toilsof matur. and he deliv thi statement with as much carefulprecis as if he had been a diplomat envoi whose word would beattend with result. inde, mr. casaubon wa not us to expect thath should have to repeat or revis hi commun of a practic orperson kind. the inclin which he had deliber state on the2d of octob he would think it enough to refer to by the mention ofthat date; judg by the standard of hi own memori, which wa avolum where a vide supra could serv instead of repetit, and notth ordinari long-us blot-book which onli tell of forgottenwrit. but in thi case mr. casaubon’s confid wa not like tobe falsifi, for dorothea heard and retain what he said with theeager interest of a fresh young natur to which everi varieti inexperi is an epoch.it wa three o’clock in the beauti breezi autumn dai when mr.casaubon drove off to hi rectori at lowick, onli five mile fromtipton; and dorothea, who had on her bonnet and shawl, hurri alongth shrubberi and across the park that she might wander through thebord wood with no other visibl companionship than that of monk,the great st. bernard dog, who alwai took care of the young ladi intheir walk. there had risen befor her the girl’s vision of a possiblefutur for herself to which she look forward with trembl hope, andsh want to wander on in that visionari futur without interrupt.she walk briskli in the brisk air, the color rose in her cheek, andher straw bonnet (which our contemporari might look at withconjectur curios as at an obsolet form of basket) fell a littlebackward. she would perhap be hardli character enough if it wereomit that she wore her brown hair flatli braid and coil behindso as to expos the outlin of her head in a dare manner at a timewhen public feel requir the meagr of natur to bedissimul by tall barricad of frizz curl and bow, neversurpass by ani great race except the feejeean. thi wa a trait ofmiss brook’s ascetic. but there wa noth of an ascet’sexpress in her bright full ey, as she look befor her, notconsci see, but absorb into the intens of her mood, thesolemn glori of the afternoon with it long swath of light betweenth far-off row of lime, whose shadow touch each other.all peopl, young or old (that is, all peopl in those ant-reformtim), would have thought her an interest object if thei hadref the glow in her ey and cheek to the newli awaken ordinaryimag of young love: the illus of chloe about strephon have beensuffici consecr in poetri, as the pathet loveli of allspontan trust ought to be. miss pippin ador young pumpkin, anddream along endless vista of unweari companionship, wa a littledrama which never tire our father and mother, and had been put intoal costum. let but pumpkin have a figur which would sustain thedisadvantag of the shortwaist swallow-tail, and everybodi felt itnot onli natur but necessari to the perfect of womanhood, that asweet girl should be at onc convinc of hi virtu, hi exceptional, and abov all, hi perfect sincer. but perhap no personsthen live—certainli none in the neighborhood of tipton—would have hada sympathet understand for the dream of a girl whose notionsabout marriag took their color entir from an exalt enthusiasmabout the end of life, an enthusiasm which wa lit chiefli by it ownfir, and includ neither the niceti of the trousseau, the patternof plate, nor even the honor and sweet joi of the bloom matron.it had now enter dorothea’s mind that mr. casaubon might wish to makeh hi wife, and the idea that he would do so touch her with a sortof reverenti gratitud. how good of him—nai, it would be almost as ifa wing messeng had suddenli stood besid her path and held out hishand toward her! for a long while she had been oppress by theindefinit which hung in her mind, like a thick summer haze, overal her desir to make her life greatli effect. what could she do,what ought she to do?—she, hardli more than a bud woman, but yetwith an activ conscienc and a great mental need, not to be satisfiedbi a girlish instruct compar to the nibbl and judgment of adiscurs mous. with some endow of stupid and conceit, shemight have thought that a christian young ladi of fortun should findher ideal of life in villag chariti, patronag of the humblerclergi, the perus of “femal scriptur charact,” unfold thepriv experi of sara under the old dispens, and dorca underth new, and the care of her soul over her embroideri in her ownboudoir—with a background of prospect marriag to a man who, if lessstrict than herself, as be involv in affair religiouslyinexplic, might be prai for and season exhort. from suchcontent poor dorothea wa shut out. the intens of her religiousdisposit, the coercion it exercis over her life, wa but oneaspect of a natur altogeth ardent, theoret, and intellectuallyconsequ: and with such a natur struggl in the band of a narrowteach, hem in by a social life which seem noth but alabyrinth of petti cours, a wall-in maze of small path that led nowhith, the outcom wa sure to strike other as at onc exaggerationand inconsist. the thing which seem to her best, she want tojustifi by the completest knowledg; and not to live in a pretendedadmiss of rule which were never act on. into thi soul-hunger asyet all her youth passion wa pour; the union which attract herwa on that would deliv her from her girlish subject to her ownignor, and give her the freedom of voluntari submiss to a guidewho would take her along the grandest path.“i should learn everyth then,” she said to herself, still walkingquickli along the bridl road through the wood. “it would be my duti tostudi that i might help him the better in hi great work. there wouldb noth trivial about our live. everi-dai thing with us would meanth greatest thing. it would be like marri pascal. i should learnto see the truth by the same light as great men have seen it by. andthen i should know what to do, when i got older: i should see how itwa possibl to lead a grand life here—now—in england. i don’t feelsur about do good in ani wai now: everyth seem like go on amiss to a peopl whose languag i don’t know;—unless it werebuild good cottag—there can be no doubt about that. oh, i hope ishould be abl to get the peopl well hous in lowick! i will drawplenti of plan while i have time.”dorothea check herself suddenli with self-rebuk for the presumptuouswai in which she wa reckon on uncertain event, but she wa sparedani inward effort to chang the direct of her thought by theappear of a canter horseman round a turn of the road. thewel-groom chestnut hors and two beauti setter could leav nodoubt that the rider wa sir jame chettam. he discern dorothea,jump off hi hors at onc, and, have deliv it to hi groom,advanc toward her with someth white on hi arm, at which the twosett were bark in an excit manner.“how delight to meet you, miss brook,” he said, rais hi hat andshow hi sleekli wave blond hair. “it ha hasten the pleasur iwa look forward to.”miss brook wa annoi at the interrupt. thi amiabl baronet,realli a suitabl husband for celia, exagger the necess ofmak himself agreeabl to the elder sister. even a prospectivebroth-in-law mai be an oppress if he will alwai be presupposingtoo good an understand with you, and agre with you even when youcontradict him. the thought that he had made the mistak of pai hisaddress to herself could not take shape: all her mental activ wasus up in persuas of anoth kind. but he wa posit obtrusiveat thi moment, and hi dimpl hand were quit disagre. herrous temper made her color deepli, as she return hi greet withsom haughti.sir jame interpret the heighten color in the wai most gratifyingto himself, and thought he never saw miss brook look so handsom.“i have brought a littl petition,” he said, “or rather, i havebrought him to see if he will be approv befor hi petit isoff.” he show the white object under hi arm, which wa a tinymaltes puppi, on of natur’s most naiv toi.“it is pain to me to see these creatur that ar bred mere aspet,” said dorothea, whose opinion wa form itself that veri moment(as opinion will) under the heat of irrit.“oh, why?” said sir jame, as thei walk forward.“i believ all the pet that is given them doe not make them happi.thei ar too helpless: their live ar too frail. a weasel or a mousethat get it own live is more interest. i like to think that theanim about us have soul someth like our own, and either carri ontheir own littl affair or can be companion to us, like monk here.those creatur ar parasit.”“i am so glad i know that you do not like them,” said good sir jame.“i should never keep them for myself, but ladi usual ar fond ofthes maltes dog. here, john, take thi dog, will you?”the objection puppi, whose nose and ey were equal black andexpress, wa thu got rid of, sinc miss brook decid that it hadbett not have been born. but she felt it necessari to explain.“you must not judg of celia’s feel from mine. i think she likesthes small pet. she had a tini terrier onc, which she wa veri fondof. it made me unhappi, becaus i wa afraid of tread on it. i amrath short-sight.”“you have your own opinion about everyth, miss brook, and it isalwai a good opinion.”what answer wa possibl to such stupid compliment?“do you know, i envi you that,” sir jame said, as thei continuedwalk at the rather brisk pace set by dorothea.“i don’t quit understand what you mean.”“your power of form an opinion. i can form an opinion of person. iknow when i like peopl. but about other matter, do you know, i haveoften a difficulti in decid. on hear veri sensibl thing said onopposit side.”“or that seem sensibl. perhap we don’t alwai discrimin betweensens and nonsens.”dorothea felt that she wa rather rude.“exactli,” said sir jame. “but you seem to have the power ofdiscrimin.”“on the contrari, i am often unabl to decid. but that is fromignor. the right conclus is there all the same, though i amun to see it.”“i think there ar few who would see it more readili. do you know,lovegood wa tell me yesterdai that you had the best notion in theworld of a plan for cottag—quit wonder for a young ladi, hethought. you had a real _genu_, to us hi express. he said youwant mr. brook to build a new set of cottag, but he seem tothink it hardli probabl that your uncl would consent. do you know,that is on of the thing i wish to do—i mean, on my own estat. ishould be so glad to carri out that plan of your, if you would let mese it. of cours, it is sink monei; that is why peopl object toit. labor can never pai rent to make it answer. but, after all, iti worth do.”“worth do! ye, inde,” said dorothea, energet, forgettingh previou small vexat. “i think we deserv to be beaten out ofour beauti hous with a scourg of small cord—all of us who letten live in such sti as we see round us. life in cottag mightb happier than our, if thei were real hous fit for human beingsfrom whom we expect duti and affect.”“will you show me your plan?”“ye, certainli. i dare sai it is veri faulti. but i have beenexamin all the plan for cottag in loudon’s book, and pick outwhat seem the best thing. oh what a happi it would be to set thepattern about here! i think instead of lazaru at the gate, we shouldput the pigsti cottag outsid the park-gate.”dorothea wa in the best temper now. sir jame, as brother in-law,build model cottag on hi estat, and then, perhap, other beingbuilt at lowick, and more and more elsewher in imit—it would bea if the spirit of oberlin had pass over the parish to make thelif of poverti beauti!sir jame saw all the plan, and took on awai to consult upon withlovegood. he also took awai a complac sens that he wa make greatprogress in miss brook’s good opinion. the maltes puppi wa notoff to celia; an omiss which dorothea afterward thought of withsurpris; but she blame herself for it. she had been engross sirjam. after all, it wa a relief that there wa no puppi to treadupon.celia wa present while the plan were be examin, and observ sirjam’s illus. “he think that dodo care about him, and she onlycar about her plan. yet i am not certain that she would refus himif she thought he would let her manag everyth and carri out all hernot. and how veri uncomfort sir jame would be! i cannot bearnot.”it wa celia’s privat luxuri to indulg in thi dislik. she dare notconfess it to her sister in ani direct statement, for that would belai herself open to a demonstr that she wa somehow or other atwar with all good. but on safe opportun, she had an indirectmod of make her neg wisdom tell upon dorothea, and call herdown from her rhapsod mood by remind her that peopl were stare,not listen. celia wa not impuls: what she had to sai could wait,and came from her alwai with the same quiet staccato even. whenpeopl talk with energi and emphasi she watch their face andfeatur mere. she never could understand how well-bred personscons to sing and open their mouth in the ridicul mannerrequisit for that vocal exercis.it wa not mani dai befor mr. casaubon paid a morn visit, on whichh wa invit again for the follow week to dine and stai the night.thu dorothea had three more convers with him, and wa convincedthat her first impress had been just. he wa all she had at firstimagin him to be: almost everyth he had said seem like aspecimen from a mine, or the inscript on the door of a museum whichmight open on the treasur of past ag; and thi trust in hi mentalwealth wa all the deeper and more effect on her inclin becauseit wa now obviou that hi visit were made for her sake. thisaccomplish man condescend to think of a young girl, and take thepain to talk to her, not with absurd compliment, but with an appeal toher understand, and sometim with instruct correct. whatdelight companionship! mr. casaubon seem even unconsci thattrivi exist, and never hand round that small-talk of heavymen which is as accept as stale bride-cake brought forth with anodor of cupboard. he talk of what he wa interest in, or els hewa silent and bow with sad civil. to dorothea thi wa adorablegenuin, and religi abstin from that artifici whichus up the soul in the effort of pretenc. for she look asrever at mr. casaubon’s religi elev abov herself as shedid at hi intellect and learn. he assent to her express ofdevout feel, and usual with an appropri quotat; he allowedhimself to sai that he had gone through some spiritu conflict in hisyouth; in short, dorothea saw that here she might reckon onunderstand, sympathi, and guidanc. on on—onli on—of her favoritethem she wa disappoint. mr. casaubon appar did not care aboutbuild cottag, and divert the talk to the extrem narrowaccommod which wa to be had in the dwell of the ancientegyptian, as if to check a too high standard. after he wa gone,dorothea dwelt with some agit on thi indiffer of hi; and hermind wa much exercis with argument drawn from the varyingcondit of climat which modifi human need, and from the admittedwicked of pagan despot. should she not urg these argument on mr.casaubon when he came again? but further reflect told her that shewa presumptu in demand hi attent to such a subject; he wouldnot disapprov of her occupi herself with it in leisur moment, asoth women expect to occupi themselv with their dress andembroideri—would not forbid it when—dorothea felt rather asham as shedetect herself in these specul. but her uncl had been invitedto go to lowick to stai a coupl of dai: wa it reason to supposethat mr. casaubon delight in mr. brook’s societi for it own sake,either with or without document?meanwhil that littl disappoint made her delight the more in sirjam chettam’s readi to set on foot the desir improv. hecam much often than mr. casaubon, and dorothea ceas to find himdisagre sinc he show himself so entir in earnest; for he hadalreadi enter with much practic abil into lovegood’s estim,and wa charmingli docil. she propos to build a coupl of cottag,and transfer two famili from their old cabin, which could then bepul down, so that new on could be built on the old site. sirjam said “exactli,” and she bore the word remark well.certainli these men who had so few spontan idea might be veryus member of societi under good feminin direct, if thei werefortun in choos their sister-in-law! it is difficult to saywheth there wa or wa not a littl wil in her continuingblind to the possibl that anoth sort of choic wa in question inrel to her. but her life wa just now full of hope and action: shewa not onli think of her plan, but get down learn book fromth librari and read mani thing hastili (that she might be a littleless ignor in talk to mr. casaubon), all the while be visitedwith conscienti question whether she were not exalt thesepoor do abov measur and contempl them with thatself-satisfact which wa the last doom of ignor and folli.chapter iv.1_st gent_. our deed ar fetter that we forg ourselv.2_d gent._ ay, truli: but i think it is the worldthat bring the iron.“sir jame seem determin to do everyth you wish,” said celia, asthei were drive home from an inspect of the new build-site.“he is a good creatur, and more sensibl than ani on would imagin,”said dorothea, inconsider.“you mean that he appear silli.”“no, no,” said dorothea, recollect herself, and lai her hand onher sister’s a moment, “but he doe not talk equal well on allsubject.”“i should think none but disagre peopl do,” said celia, in herusu pur wai. “thei must be veri dread to live with. onlythink! at breakfast, and alwai.”dorothea laugh. “o kitti, you ar a wonder creatur!” she pinchedcelia’s chin, be in the mood now to think her veri win andlov—fit hereaft to be an etern cherub, and if it were notdoctrin wrong to sai so, hardli more in need of salvat than asquirrel. “of cours peopl need not be alwai talk well. onli onetel the qualiti of their mind when thei try to talk well.”“you mean that sir jame tri and fail.”“i wa speak gener. why do you catechis me about sir jame? iti not the object of hi life to pleas me.”“now, dodo, can you realli believ that?”“certainli. he think of me as a futur sister—that is all.” dorotheahad never hint thi befor, wait, from a certain shyness on suchsubject which wa mutual between the sister, until it should beintroduc by some decis event. celia blush, but said at onc—“prai do not make that mistak ani longer, dodo. when tantripp wasbrush my hair the other dai, she said that sir jame’s man knew frommr. cadwallad’s maid that sir jame wa to marri the eldest missbrook.”“how can you let tantripp talk such gossip to you, celia?” saiddorothea, indignantli, not the less angri becaus detail asleep in hermemori were now awaken to confirm the unwelcom revel. “you musthav ask her question. it is degrad.”“i see no harm at all in tantripp’s talk to me. it is better to hearwhat peopl sai. you see what mistak you make by take up notion. iam quit sure that sir jame mean to make you an offer; and hebeliev that you will accept him, especi sinc you have been sopleas with him about the plan. and uncl too—i know he expect it.everi on can see that sir jame is veri much in love with you.”the revuls wa so strong and pain in dorothea’s mind that thetear well up and flow abundantli. all her dear plan wereembitt, and she thought with disgust of sir jame’s conceiv thatsh recogn him as her lover. there wa vexat too on account ofcelia.“how could he expect it?” she burst forth in her most impetu manner.“i have never agre with him about anyth but the cottag: i wasbar polit to him befor.”“but you have been so pleas with him sinc then; he ha begun to feelquit sure that you ar fond of him.”“fond of him, celia! how can you choos such odiou express?” saiddorothea, passion.“dear me, dorothea, i suppos it would be right for you to be fond of aman whom you accept for a husband.”“it is offens to me to sai that sir jame could think i wa fond ofhim. besid, it is not the right word for the feel i must havetoward the man i would accept as a husband.”“well, i am sorri for sir jame. i thought it right to tell you,becaus you went on as you alwai do, never look just where you ar,and tread in the wrong place. you alwai see what nobodi els see;it is imposs to satisfi you; yet you never see what is quit plain.that’s your wai, dodo.” someth certainli gave celia unusu courag;and she wa not spare the sister of whom she wa occasion in aw.who can tell what just critic murr the cat mai be pass on usb of wider specul?“it is veri pain,” said dorothea, feel scourg. “i can have nomor to do with the cottag. i must be uncivil to him. i must tell himi will have noth to do with them. it is veri pain.” her eyesfil again with tear.“wait a littl. think about it. you know he is go awai for a dai ortwo to see hi sister. there will be nobodi besid lovegood.” celiacould not help relent. “poor dodo,” she went on, in an amiablestaccato. “it is veri hard: it is your favorit _fad_ to draw plan.”“_fad_ to draw plan! do you think i onli care about myfellow-creatur’ hous in that childish wai? i mai well makemistak. how can on ever do anyth nobli christian, live amongpeopl with such petti thought?”no more wa said; dorothea wa too much jar to recov her temperand behav so as to show that she admit ani error in herself. shewa dispos rather to accus the intoler narrow and thepurblind conscienc of the societi around her: and celia wa no longerth etern cherub, but a thorn in her spirit, a pink-and-whitenullifidian, wors than ani discourag presenc in the “pilgrim’sprogress.” the _fad_ of draw plan! what wa life worth—what greatfaith wa possibl when the whole effect of on’s action could bewith up into such parch rubbish as that? when she got out of thecarriag, her cheek were pale and her eyelid red. she wa an imag ofsorrow, and her uncl who met her in the hall would have been alarm,if celia had not been close to her look so pretti and compos, thath at onc conclud dorothea’s tear to have their origin in herexcess religi. he had return, dure their absenc, from ajournei to the counti town, about a petit for the pardon of somecrimin.“well, my dear,” he said, kindli, as thei went up to kiss him, “i hopenoth disagre ha happen while i have been awai.”“no, uncl,” said celia, “we have been to freshitt to look at thecottag. we thought you would have been at home to lunch.”“i came by lowick to lunch—you didn’t know i came by lowick. and i havebrought a coupl of pamphlet for you, dorothea—in the librari, youknow; thei lie on the tabl in the librari.”it seem as if an electr stream went through dorothea, thrill herfrom despair into expect. thei were pamphlet about the earlychurch. the oppress of celia, tantripp, and sir jame wa shakenoff, and she walk straight to the librari. celia went up-stair. mr.brook wa detain by a messag, but when he re-enter the librari,he found dorothea seat and alreadi deep in on of the pamphlet whichhad some margin manuscript of mr. casaubon’s,—take it in as eagerlya she might have taken in the scent of a fresh bouquet after a dry,hot, dreari walk.she wa get awai from tipton and freshitt, and her own sadliabl to tread in the wrong place on her wai to the new jerusalem.mr. brook sat down in hi arm-chair, stretch hi leg toward thewood-fire, which had fallen into a wondrou mass of glow dicebetween the dog, and rub hi hand gentli, look veri mildlytoward dorothea, but with a neutral leisur air, as if he hadnoth particular to sai. dorothea close her pamphlet, as soon as shewa awar of her uncl’s presenc, and rose as if to go. usual shewould have been interest about her uncl’s merci errand on behalfof the crimin, but her late agit had made her absent-mind.“i came back by lowick, you know,” said mr. brook, not as if with anyintent to arrest her departur, but appar from hi usualtend to sai what he had said befor. thi fundament principl ofhuman speech wa markedli exhibit in mr. brook. “i lunch there andsaw casaubon’s librari, and that kind of thing. there’s a sharp air,drive. won’t you sit down, my dear? you look cold.”dorothea felt quit inclin to accept the invit. some time, whenher uncl’s easi wai of take thing did not happen to beexasper, it wa rather sooth. she threw off her mantl andbonnet, and sat down opposit to him, enjoi the glow, but lift upher beauti hand for a screen. thei were not thin hand, or smallhand; but power, feminin, matern hand. she seem to be holdingthem up in propiti for her passion desir to know and to think,which in the unfriendli medium of tipton and freshitt had issu incri and red eyelid.she bethought herself now of the condemn crimin. “what new havey brought about the sheep-stealer, uncl?”“what, poor bunch?—well, it seem we can’t get him off—he is to behang.”dorothea’s brow took an express of reprob and piti.“hang, you know,” said mr. brook, with a quiet nod. “poor romilli!he would have help us. i knew romilli. casaubon didn’t know romilli.he is a littl buri in book, you know, casaubon is.”“when a man ha great studi and is write a great work, he must ofcours give up see much of the world. how can he go about makingacquaint?”“that’s true. but a man mope, you know. i have alwai been a bachelortoo, but i have that sort of disposit that i never mope; it wa mywai to go about everywher and take in everyth. i never mope: but ican see that casaubon doe, you know. he want a companion—a companion,you know.”“it would be a great honor to ani on to be hi companion,” saiddorothea, energet.“you like him, eh?” said mr. brook, without show ani surpris, oroth emot. “well, now, i’ve known casaubon ten year, ever sinc hecam to lowick. but i never got anyth out of him—ani idea, youknow. howev, he is a tiptop man and mai be a bishop—that kind ofth, you know, if peel stai in. and he ha a veri high opinion ofyou, my dear.”dorothea could not speak.“the fact is, he ha a veri high opinion inde of you. and he speaksuncommonli well—doe casaubon. he ha defer to me, you not be ofag. in short, i have promis to speak to you, though i told him ithought there wa not much chanc. i wa bound to tell him that. isaid, my niec is veri young, and that kind of thing. but i didn’tthink it necessari to go into everyth. howev, the long and theshort of it is, that he ha ask my permiss to make you an offer ofmarriag—of marriag, you know,” said mr. brook, with hi explanatorynod. “i thought it better to tell you, my dear.”no on could have detect ani anxieti in mr. brook’s manner, but hedid realli wish to know someth of hi niec’s mind, that, if therewer ani need for advic, he might give it in time. what feel he, asa magistr who had taken in so mani idea, could make room for, wasunmixedli kind. sinc dorothea did not speak immedi, he repeat,“i thought it better to tell you, my dear.”“thank you, uncl,” said dorothea, in a clear unwav tone. “i amveri grate to mr. casaubon. if he make me an offer, i shall accepthim. i admir and honor him more than ani man i ever saw.”mr. brook paus a littl, and then said in a linger low tone, “ah?… well! he is a good match in some respect. but now, chettam is a goodmatch. and our land li togeth. i shall never interfer against yourwish, my dear. peopl should have their own wai in marriag, and thatsort of thing—up to a certain point, you know. i have alwai said that,up to a certain point. i wish you to marri well; and i have good reasonto believ that chettam wish to marri you. i mention it, you know.”“it is imposs that i should ever marri sir jame chettam,” saiddorothea. “if he think of marri me, he ha made a great mistak.”“that is it, you see. on never know. i should have thought chettamwa just the sort of man a woman would like, now.”“prai do not mention him in that light again, uncl,” said dorothea,feel some of her late irrit reviv.mr. brook wonder, and felt that women were an inexhaust subjectof studi, sinc even he at hi ag wa not in a perfect state ofscientif predict about them. here wa a fellow like chettam withno chanc at all.“well, but casaubon, now. there is no hurri—i mean for you. it’s true,everi year will tell upon him. he is over five-and-forti, you know. ishould sai a good seven-and-twenti year older than you. to be sure,—ifyou like learn and stand, and that sort of thing, we can’t haveeveryth. and hi incom is good—he ha a handsom propertyindepend of the church—hi incom is good. still he is not young,and i must not conceal from you, my dear, that i think hi health isnot over-strong. i know noth els against him.”“i should not wish to have a husband veri near my own ag,” saiddorothea, with grave decis. “i should wish to have a husband who wasabov me in judgment and in all knowledg.”mr. brook repeat hi subdu, “ah?—i thought you had more of yourown opinion than most girl. i thought you like your own opinion—likedit, you know.”“i cannot imagin myself live without some opinion, but i shouldwish to have good reason for them, and a wise man could help me to seewhich opinion had the best foundat, and would help me to liveaccord to them.”“veri true. you couldn’t put the thing better—couldn’t put it better,beforehand, you know. but there ar odditi in thing,” continu mr.brook, whose conscienc wa realli rous to do the best he could forhi niec on thi occas. “life isn’t cast in a mould—not cut out byrul and line, and that sort of thing. i never marri myself, and itwil be the better for you and your. the fact is, i never love anyon well enough to put myself into a noos for them. it _is_ a noos,you know. temper, now. there is temper. and a husband like to bemast.”“i know that i must expect trial, uncl. marriag is a state of higherduti. i never thought of it as mere person eas,” said poordorothea.“well, you ar not fond of show, a great establish, ball, dinner,that kind of thing. i can see that casaubon’s wai might suit youbett than chettam’s. and you shall do as you like, my dear. i wouldnot hinder casaubon; i said so at onc; for there is no know howanyth mai turn out. you have not the same tast as everi youngladi; and a clergyman and scholar—who mai be a bishop—that kind ofth—mai suit you better than chettam. chettam is a good fellow, agood sound-heart fellow, you know; but he doesn’t go much into idea.i did, when i wa hi ag. but casaubon’s ey, now. i think he hashurt them a littl with too much read.”“i should be all the happier, uncl, the more room there wa for me tohelp him,” said dorothea, ardent.“you have quit made up your mind, i see. well, my dear, the fact is, ihav a letter for you in my pocket.” mr. brook hand the letter todorothea, but as she rose to go awai, he ad, “there is not too muchhurri, my dear. think about it, you know.”when dorothea had left him, he reflect that he had certainli spokenstrongli: he had put the risk of marriag befor her in a strikingmann. it wa hi duti to do so. but as to pretend to be wise foryoung peopl,—no uncl, howev much he had travel in hi youth,absorb the new idea, and dine with celebr now deceas, couldpretend to judg what sort of marriag would turn out well for a younggirl who prefer casaubon to chettam. in short, woman wa a problemwhich, sinc mr. brook’s mind felt blank befor it, could be hardlyless complic than the revolut of an irregular solid.chapter v.“hard student ar commonli troubl with gowt, catarrh, rheum,cachexia, bradypepsia, bad ey, stone, and collick, cruditi,oppil, vertigo, wind, consumpt, and all such diseas ascom by over-much sit: thei ar most part lean, dry, ill-color …and all through immoder pain and extraordinari studi. if you willnot believ the truth of thi, look upon great tostatu and thomasaquaina’ work; and tell me whether those men took pain.”—burton’s_anatomi of melancholi_, p. i, s. 2.thi wa mr. casaubon’s letter.my dear miss brook,—i have your guardian’s permiss to address youon a subject than which i have none more at heart. i am not, i trust,mistaken in the recognit of some deeper correspond than that ofdat in the fact that a conscious of need in my own life had arisencontemporan with the possibl of my becom acquaint withyou. for in the first hour of meet you, i had an impress of youremin and perhap exclus fit to suppli that need (connect, imai sai, with such activ of the affect as even thepreoccup of a work too special to be abdic could notuninterruptedli dissimul); and each succeed opportun forobserv ha given the impress an ad depth by convinc memor emphat of that fit which i had preconceiv, and thusevok more decis those affect to which i have but nowref. our convers have, i think, made suffici clear toyou the tenor of my life and purpos: a tenor unsuit, i am awar, toth common order of mind. but i have discern in you an elevationof thought and a capabl of devoted, which i had hitherto notconceiv to be compat either with the earli bloom of youth or withthos grace of sex that mai be said at onc to win and to conferdistinct when combin, as thei notabl ar in you, with the mentalqu abov indic. it wa, i confess, beyond my hope to meetwith thi rare combin of element both solid and attract,adapt to suppli aid in graver labor and to cast a charm over vacanthour; and but for the event of my introduct to you (which, let meagain sai, i trust not to be superfici coincid withforeshadow need, but providenti relat thereto as stagestoward the complet of a life’s plan), i should presum have goneon to the last without ani attempt to lighten my solitari by amatrimoni union. such, my dear miss brook, is the accur statement of my feel; and i reli on your kind indulg in ventur now to ask you how far your own ar of a natur to confirm my happi presenti. to be accept by you as your husband and the earthli guardian of your welfar, i should regard as the highest of providenti gift. in return i can at least offer you an affect hitherto unwast, and the faith consecr of a life which, howev short in the sequel, ha no backward page whereon, if you choos to turn them, you will find record such as might justli caus you either bitter or shame. i await the express of your sentiment with an anxieti which it would be the part of wisdom (were it possibl) to divert by a more arduou labor than usual. but in thi order of experi i am still young, and in look forward to an unfavor possibl i cannot but feel that resign to solitud will be more difficult after the temporari illumin of hope.in ani case, i shall remain, your with sincer devot, edward casaubon.dorothea trembl while she read thi letter; then she fell on herkne, buri her face, and sob. she could not prai: under the rushof solemn emot in which thought becam vagu and imag floateduncertainli, she could but cast herself, with a childlik sens ofreclin, in the lap of a divin conscious which sustain herown. she remain in that attitud till it wa time to dress fordinn.how could it occur to her to examin the letter, to look at itcrit as a profess of love? her whole soul wa possess by thefact that a fuller life wa open befor her: she wa a neophyteabout to enter on a higher grade of initi. she wa go to haveroom for the energi which stir uneasili under the dim andpressur of her own ignor and the petti peremptori of theworld’s habit.now she would be abl to devot herself to larg yet definit duti;now she would be allow to live continu in the light of a mindthat she could rever. thi hope wa not unmix with the glow ofproud delight—the joyou maiden surpris that she wa chosen by the manwhom her admir had chosen. all dorothea’s passion wa transfusedthrough a mind struggl toward an ideal life; the radianc of hertransfigur girlhood fell on the first object that came within itslevel. the impetu with which inclin becam resolut washeighten by those littl event of the dai which had rous herdiscont with the actual condit of her life.after dinner, when celia wa plai an “air, with variat,” a smallkind of tinkl which symbol the aesthet part of the youngladi’ educ, dorothea went up to her room to answer mr.casaubon’s letter. why should she defer the answer? she wrote it overthre time, not becaus she wish to chang the word, but becauseh hand wa unusu uncertain, and she could not bear that mr.casaubon should think her handwrit bad and illeg. she piquedherself on write a hand in which each letter wa distinguishablewithout ani larg rang of conjectur, and she meant to make much useof thi accomplish, to save mr. casaubon’s ey. three time shewrot.my dear mr. casaubon,—i am veri grate to you for love me, andthink me worthi to be your wife. i can look forward to no betterhappi than that which would be on with your. if i said more, itwould onli be the same thing written out at greater length, for icannot now dwell on ani other thought than that i mai be through lifeyour devotedli, dorothea brook.later in the even she follow her uncl into the librari to givehim the letter, that he might send it in the morn. he wa surpris,but hi surpris onli issu in a few moment’ silenc, dure which hepush about variou object on hi write-tabl, and final stoodwith hi back to the fire, hi glass on hi nose, look at theaddress of dorothea’s letter.“have you thought enough about thi, my dear?” he said at last.“there wa no need to think long, uncl. i know of noth to make mevacil. if i chang my mind, it must be becaus of somethingimport and entir new to me.”“ah!—then you have accept him? then chettam ha no chanc? haschettam offend you—offend you, you know? what is it you don’t likein chettam?”“there is noth that i like in him,” said dorothea, ratherimpetu.mr. brook threw hi head and shoulder backward as if some on hadthrown a light missil at him. dorothea immedi felt someself-rebuk, and said—“i mean in the light of a husband. he is veri kind, i think—realli verygood about the cottag. a well-mean man.”“but you must have a scholar, and that sort of thing? well, it li alittl in our famili. i had it myself—that love of knowledg, and goinginto everyth—a littl too much—it took me too far; though that sortof thing doesn’t often run in the femal-line; or it run undergroundlik the river in greec, you know—it come out in the son. cleverson, clever mother. i went a good deal into that, at on time.howev, my dear, i have alwai said that peopl should do as thei likein these thing, up to a certain point. i couldn’t, as your guardian,have consent to a bad match. but casaubon stand well: hi positioni good. i am afraid chettam will be hurt, though, and mr. cadwalladerwil blame me.”that even, of cours, celia knew noth of what had happen. sheattribut dorothea’s abstract manner, and the evid of furthercri sinc thei had got home, to the temper she had been in about sirjam chettam and the build, and wa care not to give furtheroff: have onc said what she want to sai, celia had nodisposit to recur to disagre subject. it had been her naturewhen a child never to quarrel with ani on—onli to observ with wonderthat thei quarrel with her, and look like turkei-cock; whereuponsh wa readi to plai at cat’s cradl with them whenev thei recoveredthemselv. and as to dorothea, it had alwai been her wai to findsometh wrong in her sister’s word, though celia inwardli protestedthat she alwai said just how thing were, and noth els: she neverdid and never could put word togeth out of her own head. but thebest of dodo wa, that she did not keep angri for long togeth. now,though thei had hardli spoken to each other all the even, yet whencelia put by her work, intend to go to bed, a proceed in whichsh wa alwai much the earlier, dorothea, who wa seat on a lowstool, unabl to occupi herself except in medit, said, with themus inton which in moment of deep but quiet feel made herspeech like a fine bit of recit—“celia, dear, come and kiss me,” hold her arm open as she spoke.celia knelt down to get the right level and gave her littl butterflykiss, while dorothea encircl her with gentl arm and press herlip grave on each cheek in turn.“don’t sit up, dodo, you ar so pale to-night: go to bed soon,” saidcelia, in a comfort wai, without ani touch of patho.“no, dear, i am veri, veri happi,” said dorothea, fervent.“so much the better,” thought celia. “but how strang dodo goe fromon extrem to the other.”the next dai, at luncheon, the butler, hand someth to mr. brook,said, “jona is come back, sir, and ha brought thi letter.”mr. brook read the letter, and then, nod toward dorothea, said,“casaubon, my dear: he will be here to dinner; he didn’t wait to writemor—didn’t wait, you know.”it could not seem remark to celia that a dinner guest should beannounc to her sister beforehand, but, her ey follow the samedirect as her uncl’s, she wa struck with the peculiar effect ofth announc on dorothea. it seem as if someth like thereflect of a white sunlit wing had pass across her featur,end in on of her rare blush. for the first time it enter intocelia’s mind that there might be someth more between mr. casaubonand her sister than hi delight in bookish talk and her delight inlisten. hitherto she had class the admir for thi “ugli” andlearn acquaint with the admir for monsieur liret atlausann, also ugli and learn. dorothea had never been tire oflisten to old monsieur liret when celia’s feet were as cold asposs, and when it had realli becom dread to see the skin of hisbald head move about. why then should her enthusiasm not extend tomr. casaubon simpli in the same wai as to monsieur liret? and it seemedprob that all learn men had a sort of schoolmast’s view ofyoung peopl.but now celia wa realli startl at the suspicion which had dartedinto her mind. she wa seldom taken by surpris in thi wai, hermarvel quick in observ a certain order of sign generallyprepar her to expect such outward event as she had an interest in.not that she now imagin mr. casaubon to be alreadi an accept lover:she had onli begun to feel disgust at the possibl that anyth indorothea’s mind could tend toward such an issu. here wa somethingr to vex her about dodo: it wa all veri well not to accept sirjam chettam, but the idea of marri mr. casaubon! celia felt a sortof shame mingl with a sens of the ludicr. but perhap dodo, ifsh were realli border on such an extravag, might be turn awayfrom it: experi had often shown that her impress might becalcul on. the dai wa damp, and thei were not go to walk out,so thei both went up to their sit-room; and there celia observedthat dorothea, instead of settl down with her usual diligentinterest to some occup, simpli lean her elbow on an open bookand look out of the window at the great cedar silver with the damp.she herself had taken up the make of a toi for the curat’s children,and wa not go to enter on ani subject too precipit.dorothea wa in fact think that it wa desir for celia to knowof the moment chang in mr. casaubon’s posit sinc he had lastbeen in the hous: it did not seem fair to leav her in ignor ofwhat would necessarili affect her attitud toward him; but it wasimposs not to shrink from tell her. dorothea accus herself ofsom mean in thi timid: it wa alwai odiou to her to have anysmal fear or contriv about her action, but at thi moment shewa seek the highest aid possibl that she might not dread thecorros of celia’s pretti carnal mind prose. her reveri wasbroken, and the difficulti of decis banish, by celia’s small andrath guttur voic speak in it usual tone, of a remark asid ora “by the bye.”“is ani on els come to dine besid mr. casaubon?”“not that i know of.”“i hope there is some on els. then i shall not hear him eat hi soupso.”“what is there remark about hi soup-eat?”“realli, dodo, can’t you hear how he scrape hi spoon? and he alwaysblink befor he speak. i don’t know whether lock blink, but i’msure i am sorri for those who sat opposit to him if he did.”“celia,” said dorothea, with emphat graviti, “prai don’t make anymor observ of that kind.”“why not? thei ar quit true,” return celia, who had her reason forpersev, though she wa begin to be a littl afraid.“mani thing ar true which onli the commonest mind observ.”“then i think the commonest mind must be rather us. i think it isa piti mr. casaubon’s mother had not a common mind: she might havetaught him better.” celia wa inwardli frighten, and readi to runawai, now she had hurl thi light javelin.dorothea’s feel had gather to an avalanch, and there could be nofurth prepar.“it is right to tell you, celia, that i am engag to marri mr.casaubon.”perhap celia had never turn so pale befor. the paper man she wasmak would have had hi leg injur, but for her habitu care ofwhatev she held in her hand. she laid the fragil figur down atonc, and sat perfectli still for a few moment. when she spoke therewa a tear gather.“oh, dodo, i hope you will be happi.” her sisterli tender could notbut surmount other feel at thi moment, and her fear were thefear of affect.dorothea wa still hurt and agit.“it is quit decid, then?” said celia, in an aw under tone. “anduncl know?”“i have accept mr. casaubon’s offer. my uncl brought me the letterthat contain it; he knew about it beforehand.”“i beg your pardon, if i have said anyth to hurt you, dodo,” saidcelia, with a slight sob. she never could have thought that she shouldfeel as she did. there wa someth funer in the whole affair, andmr. casaubon seem to be the offici clergyman, about whom itwould be indec to make remark.“never mind, kitti, do not griev. we should never admir the samepeopl. i often offend in someth of the same wai; i am apt to speaktoo strongli of those who don’t pleas me.”in spite of thi magnanim dorothea wa still smart: perhap asmuch from celia’s subdu astonish as from her small critic. ofcours all the world round tipton would be out of sympathi with thismarriag. dorothea knew of no on who thought as she did about life andit best object.nevertheless befor the even wa at an end she wa veri happi. in anhour’s _tête-à-tête_ with mr. casaubon she talk to him with morefreedom than she had ever felt befor, even pour out her joi at thethought of devot herself to him, and of learn how she might bestshar and further all hi great end. mr. casaubon wa touch with anunknown delight (what man would not have been?) at thi childlikeunrestrain ardor: he wa not surpris (what lover would have been?)that he should be the object of it.“my dear young ladi—miss brook—dorothea!” he said, press her handbetween hi hand, “thi is a happi greater than i had everimagin to be in reserv for me. that i should ever meet with a mindand person so rich in the mingl grace which could render marriagedesir, wa far inde from my concept. you have all—nai, morethan all—those qualiti which i have ever regard as thecharacterist excel of womanhood. the great charm of your sex isit capabl of an ardent self-sacrif affect, and herein wese it fit to round and complet the exist of our own.hitherto i have known few pleasur save of the sever kind: mysatisfact have been those of the solitari student. i have beenlittl dispos to gather flower that would wither in my hand, but nowi shall pluck them with eager, to place them in your bosom.”no speech could have been more thoroughli honest in it intent: thefrigid rhetor at the end wa as sincer as the bark of a dog, or thecaw of an amor rook. would it not be rash to conclud that therewa no passion behind those sonnet to delia which strike us as thethin music of a mandolin?dorothea’s faith suppli all that mr. casaubon’s word seem to leaveunsaid: what believ see a disturb omiss or infel? thetext, whether of prophet or of poet, expand for whatev we can putinto it, and even hi bad grammar is sublim.“i am veri ignor—you will quit wonder at my ignor,” saiddorothea. “i have so mani thought that mai be quit mistaken; and nowi shall be abl to tell them all to you, and ask you about them. but,”she ad, with rapid imagin of mr. casaubon’s probabl feel,“i will not troubl you too much; onli when you ar inclin to listento me. you must often be weari with the pursuit of subject in your owntrack. i shall gain enough if you will take me with you there.”“how should i be abl now to persever in ani path without yourcompanionship?” said mr. casaubon, kiss her candid brow, and feelingthat heaven had vouchsaf him a bless in everi wai suit to hispeculiar want. he wa be unconsci wrought upon by the charmsof a natur which wa entir without hidden calcul either forimmedi effect or for remot end. it wa thi which made dorotheaso childlik, and, accord to some judg, so stupid, with all herreput clever; as, for exampl, in the present case of throwingherself, metaphor speak, at mr. casaubon’s feet, and kissinghi unfashion shoe-ti as if he were a protest pope. she wasnot in the least teach mr. casaubon to ask if he were good enoughfor her, but mere ask herself anxious how she could be goodenough for mr. casaubon. befor he left the next dai it had beendecid that the marriag should take place within six week. why not?mr. casaubon’s hous wa readi. it wa not a parsonag, but aconsider mansion, with much land attach to it. the parsonag wasinhabit by the curat, who did all the duti except preach themorn sermon.chapter vi.my ladi’s tongu is like the meadow blade,that cut you stroke them with idl hand.nice cut is her function: she divideswith spiritu edg the millet-seed,and make intang save.as mr. casaubon’s carriag wa pass out of the gatewai, it arrestedth entranc of a poni phaeton driven by a ladi with a servant seatedbehind. it wa doubt whether the recognit had been mutual, formr. casaubon wa look absent befor him; but the ladi wasquick-ei, and threw a nod and a “how do you do?” in the nick of time.in spite of her shabbi bonnet and veri old indian shawl, it wa plainthat the lodg-keeper regard her as an import personag, from thelow curtsi which wa drop on the entranc of the small phaeton.“well, mr. fitchett, how ar your fowl lai now?” said thehigh-color, dark-ei ladi, with the clearest chisel utter.“pretti well for lai, madam, but thei’ve ta’en to eat their egg:i’ve no peac o’ mind with ’em at all.”“oh, the cannib! better sell them cheap at onc. what will you sellthem a coupl? on can’t eat fowl of a bad charact at a high price.”“well, madam, half-a-crown: i couldn’t let ’em go, not under.”“half-a-crown, these time! come now—for the rector’s chicken-broth ona sundai. he ha consum all our that i can spare. you ar half paidwith the sermon, mr. fitchett, rememb that. take a pair oftumbl-pigeon for them—littl beauti. you must come and see them.you have no tumbler among your pigeon.”“well, madam, master fitchett shall go and see ’em after work. he’sveri hot on new sort; to oblig you.”“oblig me! it will be the best bargain he ever made. a pair of churchpigeon for a coupl of wick spanish fowl that eat their own egg!don’t you and fitchett boast too much, that is all!”the phaeton wa driven onward with the last word, leav mr.fitchett laugh and shake her head slowli, with an interject“sure_ly_, sure_ly_!”—from which it might be infer that she wouldhav found the countri-side somewhat duller if the rector’s ladi hadbeen less free-spoken and less of a skinflint. inde, both the farmersand labor in the parish of freshitt and tipton would have felt asad lack of convers but for the stori about what mr.cadwallad said and did: a ladi of immeasur high birth, descend,as it were, from unknown earl, dim as the crowd of heroic shade—whoplead poverti, pare down price, and cut joke in the mostcompanion manner, though with a turn of tongu that let you knowwho she wa. such a ladi gave a neighborli to both rank andreligion, and mitig the bitter of uncommut tith. a much moreexemplari charact with an infus of sour digniti would not havefurth their comprehens of the thirti-nine articl, and wouldhav been less social unit.mr. brook, see mr. cadwallad’s merit from a differ point ofview, winc a littl when her name wa announc in the librari, whereh wa sit alon.“i see you have had our lowick cicero here,” she said, seat herselfcomfort, throw back her wrap, and show a thin but well-builtfigur. “i suspect you and he ar brew some bad politi, els youwould not be see so much of the live man. i shall inform againsty: rememb you ar both suspici charact sinc you took peel’sside about the cathol bill. i shall tell everybodi that you ar goingto put up for middlemarch on the whig side when old pinkerton resign,and that casaubon is go to help you in an underhand manner: go tobrib the voter with pamphlet, and throw open the public-hous todistribut them. come, confess!”“noth of the sort,” said mr. brook, smile and rub hisey-glass, but realli blush a littl at the impeach. “casaubonand i don’t talk polit much. he doesn’t care much about thephilanthrop side of thing; punish, and that kind of thing. heonli care about church question. that is not my line of action, youknow.”“ra-a-ther too much, my friend. i have heard of your do. who wa itthat sold hi bit of land to the papist at middlemarch? i believ youbought it on purpos. you ar a perfect gui faux. see if you ar notburnt in effigi thi 5th of novemb come. humphrei would not come toquarrel with you about it, so i am come.”“veri good. i wa prepar to be persecut for not persecut—notpersecut, you know.”“there you go! that is a piec of clap-trap you have got readi for thehust. now, _do not_ let them lure you to the hust, my dear mr.brook. a man alwai make a fool of himself, speechifi: there’s noexcus but be on the right side, so that you can ask a bless onyour hum and haw. you will lose yourself, i forewarn you. youwil make a saturdai pie of all parti’ opinion, and be pelt byeverybodi.”“that is what i expect, you know,” said mr. brook, not wish tobetrai how littl he enjoi thi prophet sketch—“what i expect as anindepend man. as to the whig, a man who goe with the thinker isnot like to be hook on by ani parti. he mai go with them up to acertain point—up to a certain point, you know. but that is what youladi never understand.”“where your certain point is? no. i should like to be told how a mancan have ani certain point when he belong to no parti—lead a rovinglif, and never let hi friend know hi address. ‘nobodi knowswher brook will be—there’s no count on brook’—that is what peoplesai of you, to be quit frank. now, do turn respect. how will youlik go to session with everybodi look shy on you, and you witha bad conscienc and an empti pocket?”“i don’t pretend to argu with a ladi on polit,” said mr. brook,with an air of smile indiffer, but feel rather unpleasantlyconsci that thi attack of mr. cadwallad’s had open thedefens campaign to which certain rash step had expos him. “yoursex ar not thinker, you know—_varium et mutabil semper_—that kind ofth. you don’t know virgil. i knew”—mr. brook reflect in time thath had not had the person acquaint of the augustan poet—“i wasgo to sai, poor stoddart, you know. that wa what _he_ said. youladi ar alwai against an independ attitud—a man’s care fornoth but truth, and that sort of thing. and there is no part of thecounti where opinion is narrow than it is here—i don’t mean to throwston, you know, but somebodi is want to take the independ line;and if i don’t take it, who will?”“who? why, ani upstart who ha got neither blood nor posit. peopleof stand should consum their independ nonsens at home, not hawkit about. and you! who ar go to marri your niec, as good as yourdaught, to on of our best men. sir jame would be cruelli annoi:it will be too hard on him if you turn round now and make yourself awhig sign-board.”mr. brook again winc inwardli, for dorothea’s engag had nosoon been decid, than he had thought of mr. cadwallad’sprospect taunt. it might have been easi for ignor observ tosai, “quarrel with mr. cadwallad;” but where is a countri gentlemanto go who quarrel with hi oldest neighbor? who could tast the fineflavor in the name of brook if it were deliv casual, like winewithout a seal? certainli a man can onli be cosmopolitan up to acertain point.“i hope chettam and i shall alwai be good friend; but i am sorri tosai there is no prospect of hi marri my niec,” said mr. brook,much reliev to see through the window that celia wa come in.“why not?” said mr. cadwallad, with a sharp note of surpris. “it ishardli a fortnight sinc you and i were talk about it.”“my niec ha chosen anoth suitor—ha chosen him, you know. i havehad noth to do with it. i should have prefer chettam; and ishould have said chettam wa the man ani girl would have chosen. butther is no account for these thing. your sex is caprici, youknow.”“why, whom do you mean to sai that you ar go to let her marri?”mr. cadwallad’s mind wa rapidli survei the possibl ofchoic for dorothea.but here celia enter, bloom from a walk in the garden, and thegreet with her deliv mr. brook from the necess of answeringimmedi. he got up hastili, and sai, “by the wai, i must speakto wright about the hors,” shuffl quickli out of the room.“my dear child, what is thi?—thi about your sister’s engag?”said mr. cadwallad.“she is engag to marri mr. casaubon,” said celia, resort, asusu, to the simplest statement of fact, and enjoi thi opportunityof speak to the rector’s wife alon.“thi is fright. how long ha it been go on?”“i onli knew of it yesterdai. thei ar to be marri in six week.”“well, my dear, i wish you joi of your brother-in-law.”“i am so sorri for dorothea.”“sorri! it is her do, i suppos.”“ye; she sai mr. casaubon ha a great soul.”“with all my heart.”“oh, mr. cadwallad, i don’t think it can be nice to marri a man witha great soul.”“well, my dear, take warn. you know the look of on now; when thenext come and want to marri you, don’t you accept him.”“i’m sure i never should.”“no; on such in a famili is enough. so your sister never care aboutsir jame chettam? what would you have said to _him_ for abroth-in-law?”“i should have like that veri much. i am sure he would have been agood husband. onli,” celia ad, with a slight blush (she sometimesseem to blush as she breath), “i don’t think he would have suiteddorothea.”“not high-flown enough?”“dodo is veri strict. she think so much about everyth, and is soparticular about what on sai. sir jame never seem to pleas her.”“she must have encourag him, i am sure. that is not veri credit.”“pleas don’t be angri with dodo; she doe not see thing. she thoughtso much about the cottag, and she wa rude to sir jame sometim;but he is so kind, he never notic it.”“well,” said mr. cadwallad, put on her shawl, and rise, as ifin hast, “i must go straight to sir jame and break thi to him. hewil have brought hi mother back by thi time, and i must call. youruncl will never tell him. we ar all disappoint, my dear. youngpeopl should think of their famili in marri. i set a badexampl—marri a poor clergyman, and made myself a pitiabl objectamong the de braci—oblig to get my coal by stratagem, and prai toheaven for my salad oil. howev, casaubon ha monei enough; i must dohim that justic. as to hi blood, i suppos the famili quarter arethre cuttl-fish sabl, and a comment rampant. by the bye, beforei go, my dear, i must speak to your mr. carter about pastri. i want tosend my young cook to learn of her. poor peopl with four children,like us, you know, can’t afford to keep a good cook. i have no doubtmr. carter will oblig me. sir jame’s cook is a perfect dragon.”in less than an hour, mr. cadwallad had circumv mr. carter anddriven to freshitt hall, which wa not far from her own parsonag, herhusband be resid in freshitt and keep a curat in tipton.sir jame chettam had return from the short journei which had kepthim absent for a coupl of dai, and had chang hi dress, intendingto ride over to tipton grang. hi hors wa stand at the door whenmr. cadwallad drove up, and he immedi appear there himself,whip in hand. ladi chettam had not yet return, but mr. cadwallad’serrand could not be despatch in the presenc of groom, so she askedto be taken into the conservatori close by, to look at the new plant;and on come to a contempl stand, she said—“i have a great shock for you; i hope you ar not so far gone in lovea you pretend to be.”it wa of no us protest against mr. cadwallad’s wai of puttingth. but sir jame’s counten chang a littl. he felt a vaguealarm.“i do believ brook is go to expos himself after all. i accusedhim of mean to stand for middlemarch on the liber side, and helook silli and never deni it—talk about the independ line, andth usual nonsens.”“is that all?” said sir jame, much reliev.“why,” rejoin mr. cadwallad, with a sharper note, “you don’t meanto sai that you would like him to turn public man in that wai—make asort of polit cheap jack of himself?”“he might be dissuad, i should think. he would not like the expens.”“that is what i told him. he is vulner to reason there—alwai a fewgrain of common-sens in an ounc of miserli. miserli is acapit qualiti to run in famili; it’s the safe side for mad todip on. and there must be a littl crack in the brook famili, els weshould not see what we ar to see.”“what? brook stand for middlemarch?”“wors than that. i realli feel a littl respons. i alwai told youmiss brook would be such a fine match. i knew there wa a great dealof nonsens in her—a flighti sort of methodist stuff. but theseth wear out of girl. howev, i am taken by surpris for onc.”“what do you mean, mr. cadwallad?” said sir jame. hi fear lestmiss brook should have run awai to join the moravian brethren, or somepreposter sect unknown to good societi, wa a littl allai by theknowledg that mr. cadwallad alwai made the worst of thing. “whatha happen to miss brook? prai speak out.”“veri well. she is engag to be marri.” mr. cadwallad paus afew moment, observ the deepli hurt express in her friend’s face,which he wa try to conceal by a nervou smile, while he whip hisboot; but she soon ad, “engag to casaubon.”sir jame let hi whip fall and stoop to pick it up. perhap hi facehad never befor gather so much concentr disgust as when heturn to mr. cadwallad and repeat, “casaubon?”“even so. you know my errand now.”“good god! it is horribl! he is no better than a mummi!” (the point ofview ha to be allow for, as that of a bloom and disappointedriv.)“she sai, he is a great soul.—a great bladder for dri pea to rattlein!” said mr. cadwallad.“what busi ha an old bachelor like that to marri?” said sir jame.“he ha on foot in the grave.”“he mean to draw it out again, i suppos.”“brook ought not to allow it: he should insist on it be put offtil she is of ag. she would think better of it then. what is aguardian for?”“as if you could ever squeez a resolut out of brook!”“cadwallad might talk to him.”“not he! humphrei find everybodi charm. i never can get him toabus casaubon. he will even speak well of the bishop, though i tellhim it is unnatur in a benef clergyman; what can on do with ahusband who attend so littl to the decenc? i hide it as well as ican by abus everybodi myself. come, come, cheer up! you ar well ridof miss brook, a girl who would have been requir you to see thestar by daylight. between ourselv, littl celia is worth two of her,and like after all to be the better match. for thi marriag tocasaubon is as good as go to a nunneri.”“oh, on my own account—it is for miss brook’s sake i think her friendsshould try to us their influenc.”“well, humphrei doesn’t know yet. but when i tell him, you mai dependon it he will sai, ‘why not? casaubon is a good fellow—and young—youngenough.’ these charit peopl never know vinegar from wine till theyhav swallow it and got the colic. howev, if i were a man i shouldpref celia, especi when dorothea wa gone. the truth is, you havebeen court on and have won the other. i can see that she admiresy almost as much as a man expect to be admir. if it were ani onebut me who said so, you might think it exagger. good-by!”sir jame hand mr. cadwallad to the phaeton, and then jump onhi hors. he wa not go to renounc hi ride becaus of hisfriend’s unpleas new—onli to ride the faster in some otherdirect than that of tipton grang.now, why on earth should mr. cadwallad have been at all busi aboutmiss brook’s marriag; and why, when on match that she like to thinksh had a hand in wa frustrat, should she have straightwai contrivedth preliminari of anoth? wa there ani ingeni plot, anyhid-and-seek cours of action, which might be detect by a carefultelescop watch? not at all: a telescop might have swept the parishesof tipton and freshitt, the whole area visit by mr. cadwallad inher phaeton, without wit ani interview that could excitesuspicion, or ani scene from which she did not return with the sameunperturb keen of ey and the same high natur color. in fact,if that conveni vehicl had exist in the dai of the seven sage,on of them would doubtless have remark, that you can know littl ofwomen by follow them about in their poni-phaeton. even with amicroscop direct on a water-drop we find ourselv makinginterpret which turn out to be rather coars; for wherea under aweak len you mai seem to see a creatur exhibit an activ voracityinto which other smaller creatur activ plai as if thei were somani anim tax-penni, a stronger len reveal to you certaintiniest hairlet which make vortic for these victim while theswallow wait passiv at hi receipt of custom. in thi wai,metaphor speak, a strong len appli to mr. cadwallad’smatch-make will show a plai of minut caus produc what mai becal thought and speech vortic to bring her the sort of food sheneed. her life wa rural simpl, quit free from secret eitherfoul, danger, or otherwis import, and not conscious affectedbi the great affair of the world. all the more did the affair of thegreat world interest her, when commun in the letter of high-bornrel: the wai in which fascin younger son had gone to thedog by marri their mistress; the fine old-blood idioci of younglord tapir, and the furiou gouti humor of old lord megatherium; theexact cross of genealog which had brought a coronet into a newbranch and widen the relat of scandal,—these were topic of whichsh retain detail with the utmost accuraci, and reproduc them inan excel pickl of epigram, which she herself enjoi the morebecaus she believ as unquestion in birth and no-birth as she didin game and vermin. she would never have disown ani on on the groundof poverti: a de braci reduc to take hi dinner in a basin would haveseem to her an exampl of patho worth exagger, and i fear hisaristocrat vice would not have horrifi her. but her feelingtoward the vulgar rich wa a sort of religi hatr: thei hadprob made all their monei out of high retail price, and mr.cadwallad detest high price for everyth that wa not paid inkind at the rectori: such peopl were no part of god’s design in makingth world; and their accent wa an afflict to the ear. a town wheresuch monster abound wa hardli more than a sort of low comedi, whichcould not be taken account of in a well-bred scheme of the univers.let ani ladi who is inclin to be hard on mr. cadwallad inquireinto the comprehens of her own beauti view, and be quitesur that thei afford accommod for all the live which have thehonor to coexist with her.with such a mind, activ as phosphoru, bite everyth that camenear into the form that suit it, how could mr. cadwallad feel thatth miss brook and their matrimoni prospect were alien to her?especi as it had been the habit of year for her to scold mr.brook with the friendliest frank, and let him know in confidencethat she thought him a poor creatur. from the first arriv of theyoung ladi in tipton she had prearrang dorothea’s marriag with sirjam, and if it had taken place would have been quit sure that it washer do: that it should not take place after she had preconceiv it,caus her an irrit which everi thinker will sympath with. shewa the diplomatist of tipton and freshitt, and for anyth to happenin spite of her wa an offens irregular. as to freak like thisof miss brook’s, mr. cadwallad had no patienc with them, and nowsaw that her opinion of thi girl had been infect with some of herhusband’s weak charit: those methodist whim, that air ofb more religi than the rector and curat togeth, came from adeep and more constitut diseas than she had been will tobeliev.“howev,” said mr. cadwallad, first to herself and afterward toher husband, “i throw her over: there wa a chanc, if she had marriedsir jame, of her becom a sane, sensibl woman. he would never havecontradict her, and when a woman is not contradict, she ha nomot for obstinaci in her absurd. but now i wish her joi of herhair shirt.”it follow that mr. cadwallad must decid on anoth match for sirjam, and have made up her mind that it wa to be the younger missbrook, there could not have been a more skil move toward thesuccess of her plan than her hint to the baronet that he had made animpress on celia’s heart. for he wa not on of those gentlemen wholanguish after the unattain sappho’s appl that laugh from thetopmost bough—the charm which“smile like the knot of cowslip on the cliff,not to be come at by the will hand.”he had no sonnet to write, and it could not strike him agreeabl thath wa not an object of prefer to the woman whom he had prefer.alreadi the knowledg that dorothea had chosen mr. casaubon had bruisedhi attach and relax it hold. although sir jame wa asportsman, he had some other feel toward women than toward grouseand fox, and did not regard hi futur wife in the light of prei,valuabl chiefli for the excit of the chase. neither wa he sowel acquaint with the habit of primit race as to feel that anid combat for her, tomahawk in hand, so to speak, wa necessari toth histor continu of the marriag-tie. on the contrari, havingth amiabl vaniti which knit us to those who ar fond of us, anddisinclin us to those who ar indiffer, and also a good gratefulnatur, the mere idea that a woman had a kind toward him spunlittl thread of tender from out hi heart toward her.thu it happen, that after sir jame had ridden rather fast for halfan hour in a direct awai from tipton grang, he slacken hi pace,and at last turn into a road which would lead him back by a shortercut. variou feel wrought in him the determin after all to goto the grang to-dai as if noth new had happen. he could not helprejo that he had never made the offer and been reject; merefriendli polit requir that he should call to see dorothea aboutth cottag, and now happili mr. cadwallad had prepar him tooffer hi congratul, if necessari, without show too muchawkward. he realli did not like it: give up dorothea wa verypain to him; but there wa someth in the resolv to make thisvisit forthwith and conquer all show of feel, which wa a sort offil-bite and counter-irrit. and without hi distinctlyrecogn the impuls, there certainli wa present in him the sensethat celia would be there, and that he should pai her more attentionthan he had done befor.we mortal, men and women, devour mani a disappoint betweenbreakfast and dinner-time; keep back the tear and look a littl paleabout the lip, and in answer to inquiri sai, “oh, noth!” pridehelp us; and pride is not a bad thing when it onli urg us to hideour own hurt—not to hurt other.chapter vii.“piacer e poponevuol la sua stagion.”—_italian proverb_.mr. casaubon, as might be expect, spent a great deal of hi time atth grang in these week, and the hindranc which courtship occasionedto the progress of hi great work—the kei to all mytholog—naturallymad him look forward the more eagerli to the happi termin ofcourtship. but he had deliber incur the hindranc, have madeup hi mind that it wa now time for him to adorn hi life with thegrac of femal companionship, to irradi the gloom which fatiguewa apt to hang over the interv of studiou labor with the plai offemal fanci, and to secur in thi, hi culmin ag, the solac offemal tendanc for hi declin year. henc he determin to abandonhimself to the stream of feel, and perhap wa surpris to findwhat an exceedingli shallow rill it wa. as in droughti region baptismbi immers could onli be perform symbol, mr. casaubon foundthat sprinkl wa the utmost approach to a plung which hi streamwould afford him; and he conclud that the poet had much exaggeratedth forc of masculin passion. nevertheless, he observ with pleasurethat miss brook show an ardent submiss affect which promisedto fulfil hi most agreeabl previs of marriag. it had onc ortwic cross hi mind that possibl there wa some defici indorothea to account for the moder of hi abandon; but he wasun to discern the defici, or to figur to himself a woman whowould have pleas him better; so that there wa clearli no reason tofal back upon but the exagger of human tradit.“could i not be prepar myself now to be more us?” said dorotheato him, on morn, earli in the time of courtship; “could i not learnto read latin and greek aloud to you, as milton’s daughter did totheir father, without understand what thei read?”“i fear that would be wearisom to you,” said mr. casaubon, smile;“and, inde, if i rememb rightli, the young women you have mentionedregard that exercis in unknown tongu as a ground for rebellionagainst the poet.”“ye; but in the first place thei were veri naughti girl, els theywould have been proud to minist to such a father; and in the secondplac thei might have studi privat and taught themselv tounderstand what thei read, and then it would have been interest. ihop you don’t expect me to be naughti and stupid?”“i expect you to be all that an exquisit young ladi can be in everyposs relat of life. certainli it might be a great advantag ifyou were abl to copi the greek charact, and to that end it were wellto begin with a littl read.”dorothea seiz thi as a preciou permiss. she would not have askedmr. casaubon at onc to teach her the languag, dread of all thingsto be tiresom instead of help; but it wa not entir out ofdevot to her futur husband that she wish to know latin and greek.those provinc of masculin knowledg seem to her a stand-groundfrom which all truth could be seen more truli. as it wa, sheconstantli doubt her own conclus, becaus she felt her ownignor: how could she be confid that on-room cottag were notfor the glori of god, when men who knew the classic appear toconcili indiffer to the cottag with zeal for the glori?perhap even hebrew might be necessari—at least the alphabet and a fewroot—in order to arriv at the core of thing, and judg soundli onth social duti of the christian. and she had not reach that pointof renunci at which she would have been satisfi with have awis husband: she wish, poor child, to be wise herself. miss brookewa certainli veri naiv with all her alleg clever. celia, whosemind had never been thought too power, saw the empti of otherpeopl’s pretens much more readili. to have in gener but littlefeel, seem to be the onli secur against feel too much on anyparticular occas.howev, mr. casaubon consent to listen and teach for an hourtogeth, like a schoolmast of littl boi, or rather like a lover,to whom a mistress’s elementari ignor and difficulti have atouch fit. few scholar would have dislik teach thealphabet under such circumst. but dorothea herself wa a littleshock and discourag at her own stupid, and the answer she gotto some timid question about the valu of the greek accent gave her apain suspicion that here inde there might be secret not capableof explan to a woman’s reason.mr. brook had no doubt on that point, and express himself with hisusu strength upon it on dai that he came into the librari while theread wa go forward.“well, but now, casaubon, such deep studi, classic, mathemat,that kind of thing, ar too tax for a woman—too tax, you know.”“dorothea is learn to read the charact simpli,” said mr.casaubon, evad the question. “she had the veri consider thoughtof save my ey.”“ah, well, without understand, you know—that mai not be so bad. butther is a light about the feminin mind—a touch and go—music, thefin art, that kind of thing—thei should studi those up to a certainpoint, women should; but in a light wai, you know. a woman should beabl to sit down and plai you or sing you a good old english tune. thati what i like; though i have heard most thing—been at the opera invienna: gluck, mozart, everyth of that sort. but i’m a conservativein music—it’s not like idea, you know. i stick to the good old tune.”“mr. casaubon is not fond of the piano, and i am veri glad he is not,”said dorothea, whose slight regard for domest music and feminin fineart must be forgiven her, consid the small tinkl and smearingin which thei chiefli consist at that dark period. she smile andlook up at her betroth with grate ey. if he had alwai beenask her to plai the “last rose of summer,” she would have requiredmuch resign. “he sai there is onli an old harpsichord at lowick,and it is cover with book.”“ah, there you ar behind celia, my dear. celia, now, plai veryprettili, and is alwai readi to plai. howev, sinc casaubon doe notlik it, you ar all right. but it’s a piti you should not have littlerecr of that sort, casaubon: the bow alwai strung—that kind ofth, you know—will not do.”“i never could look on it in the light of a recreat to have my earsteas with measur nois,” said mr. casaubon. “a tune much iteratedha the ridicul effect of make the word in my mind perform a sortof minuet to keep time—an effect hardli toler, i imagin, afterboyhood. as to the grander form of music, worthi to accompani solemncelebr, and even to serv as an educ influenc accord toth ancient concept, i sai noth, for with these we ar notimmedi concern.”“no; but music of that sort i should enjoi,” said dorothea. “when wewer come home from lausann my uncl took us to hear the great organat freiberg, and it made me sob.”“that kind of thing is not healthi, my dear,” said mr. brook.“casaubon, she will be in your hand now: you must teach my niec totak thing more quietli, eh, dorothea?”he end with a smile, not wish to hurt hi niec, but reallythink that it wa perhap better for her to be earli marri to sosob a fellow as casaubon, sinc she would not hear of chettam.“it is wonder, though,” he said to himself as he shuffl out of theroom—“it is wonder that she should have like him. howev, thematch is good. i should have been travel out of my brief to havehind it, let mr. cadwallad sai what she will. he is prettycertain to be a bishop, is casaubon. that wa a veri seasonablepamphlet of hi on the cathol question:—a deaneri at least. thei owehim a deaneri.”and here i must vindic a claim to philosoph reflect, byremark that mr. brook on thi occas littl thought of therad speech which, at a later period, he wa led to make on theincom of the bishop. what eleg historian would neglect a strikingopportun for point out that hi hero did not forese thehistori of the world, or even their own action?—for exampl, thathenri of navarr, when a protest babi, littl thought of be acathol monarch; or that alfr the great, when he measur hislabori night with burn candl, had no idea of futur gentlemenmeasur their idl dai with watch. here is a mine of truth, which,howev vigor it mai be work, is like to outlast our coal.but of mr. brook i make a further remark perhap less warrant bypreced—name, that if he had foreknown hi speech, it might nothav made ani great differ. to think with pleasur of hi niec’shusband have a larg ecclesiast incom wa on thing—to make aliber speech wa anoth thing; and it is a narrow mind which cannotlook at a subject from variou point of view.chapter viii.“oh, rescu her! i am her brother now,and you her father. everi gentl maidshould have a guardian in each gentleman.”it wa wonder to sir jame chettam how well he continu to likego to the grang after he had onc encount the difficulti ofse dorothea for the first time in the light of a woman who wasengag to anoth man. of cours the fork lightn seem to passthrough him when he first approach her, and he remain consciousthroughout the interview of hide uneasi; but, good as he wa, itmust be own that hi uneasi wa less than it would have been ifh had thought hi rival a brilliant and desir match. he had nosens of be eclips by mr. casaubon; he wa onli shock thatdorothea wa under a melancholi illus, and hi mortif lostsom of it bitter by be mingl with compass.nevertheless, while sir jame said to himself that he had completelyresign her, sinc with the pervers of a desdemona she had notaffect a propos match that wa clearli suitabl and accord tonatur; he could not yet be quit passiv under the idea of herengag to mr. casaubon. on the dai when he first saw them togetherin the light of hi present knowledg, it seem to him that he had nottaken the affair serious enough. brook wa realli culpabl; he oughtto have hinder it. who could speak to him? someth might be doneperhap even now, at least to defer the marriag. on hi wai home heturn into the rectori and ask for mr. cadwallad. happili, therector wa at home, and hi visitor wa shown into the studi, where allth fish tackl hung. but he himself wa in a littl room adjoin,at work with hi turn apparatu, and he call to the baronet tojoin him there. the two were better friend than ani other landholderand clergyman in the counti—a signific fact which wa in agreementwith the amiabl express of their face.mr. cadwallad wa a larg man, with full lip and a sweet smile; veryplain and rough in hi exterior, but with that solid imperturb easeand good-humor which is infecti, and like great grassi hill in thesunshin, quiet even an irrit egoism, and make it rather ashamedof itself. “well, how ar you?” he said, show a hand not quit fitto be grasp. “sorri i miss you befor. is there anythingparticular? you look vex.”sir jame’s brow had a littl creas in it, a littl depress of theeyebrow, which he seem purpos to exagger as he answer.“it is onli thi conduct of brook’s. i realli think somebodi shouldspeak to him.”“what? mean to stand?” said mr. cadwallad, go on with thearrang of the reel which he had just been turn. “i hardlythink he mean it. but where’s the harm, if he like it? ani on whoobject to whiggeri should be glad when the whig don’t put up thestrongest fellow. thei won’t overturn the constitut with our friendbrook’s head for a batter ram.”“oh, i don’t mean that,” said sir jame, who, after put down hishat and throw himself into a chair, had begun to nurs hi leg andexamin the sole of hi boot with much bitter. “i mean thismarriag. i mean hi let that bloom young girl marri casaubon.”“what is the matter with casaubon? i see no harm in him—if the girllik him.”“she is too young to know what she like. her guardian ought tointerfer. he ought not to allow the thing to be done in thi headlongmann. i wonder a man like you, cadwallad—a man with daughter, canlook at the affair with indiffer: and with such a heart as your!do think serious about it.”“i am not joke; i am as seriou as possibl,” said the rector, with aprovok littl inward laugh. “you ar as bad as elinor. she ha beenwant me to go and lectur brook; and i have remind her that herfriend had a veri poor opinion of the match she made when she marriedm.”“but look at casaubon,” said sir jame, indignantli. “he must be fifti,and i don’t believ he could ever have been much more than the shadowof a man. look at hi leg!”“confound you handsom young fellow! you think of have it all yourown wai in the world. you don’t understand women. thei don’t admir youhalf so much as you admir yourselv. elinor us to tell her sistersthat she marri me for my ugli—it wa so variou and amus thatit had quit conquer her prudenc.”“you! it wa easi enough for a woman to love you. but thi is noquest of beauti. i don’t _like_ casaubon.” thi wa sir jame’sstrongest wai of impli that he thought ill of a man’s charact.“why? what do you know against him?” said the rector lai down hisreel, and put hi thumb into hi armhol with an air ofattent.sir jame paus. he did not usual find it easi to give hi reason:it seem to him strang that peopl should not know them without beingtold, sinc he onli felt what wa reason. at last he said—“now, cadwallad, ha he got ani heart?”“well, ye. i don’t mean of the melt sort, but a sound kernel,_that_ you mai be sure of. he is veri good to hi poor relat:pension sever of the women, and is educ a young fellow at agood deal of expens. casaubon act up to hi sens of justic. hismoth’s sister made a bad match—a pole, i think—lost herself—at anyr wa disown by her famili. if it had not been for that, casaubonwould not have had so much monei by half. i believ he went himself tofind out hi cousin, and see what he could do for them. everi manwould not ring so well as that, if you tri hi metal. _you_ would,chettam; but not everi man.”“i don’t know,” said sir jame, color. “i am not so sure of myself.”he paus a moment, and then ad, “that wa a right thing forcasaubon to do. but a man mai wish to do what is right, and yet be asort of parchment code. a woman mai not be happi with him. and i thinkwhen a girl is so young as miss brook is, her friend ought tointerfer a littl to hinder her from do anyth foolish. youlaugh, becaus you fanci i have some feel on my own account. butupon my honor, it is not that. i should feel just the same if i weremiss brook’s brother or uncl.”“well, but what should you do?”“i should sai that the marriag must not be decid on until she wa ofag. and depend upon it, in that case, it would never come off. i wishyou saw it as i do—i wish you would talk to brook about it.”sir jame rose as he wa finish hi sentenc, for he saw mr.cadwallad enter from the studi. she held by the hand her youngestgirl, about five year old, who immedi ran to papa, and wa madecomfort on hi knee.“i hear what you ar talk about,” said the wife. “but you will makeno impress on humphrei. as long as the fish rise to hi bait,everybodi is what he ought to be. bless you, casaubon ha got atrout-stream, and doe not care about fish in it himself: couldther be a better fellow?”“well, there is someth in that,” said the rector, with hi quiet,inward laugh. “it is a veri good qualiti in a man to have atrout-stream.”“but serious,” said sir jame, whose vexat had not yet spentitself, “don’t you think the rector might do some good by speak?”“oh, i told you beforehand what he would sai,” answer mr.cadwallad, lift up her eyebrow. “i have done what i could: i washmi hand of the marriag.”“in the first place,” said the rector, look rather grave, “it wouldb nonsens to expect that i could convinc brook, and make him actaccordingli. brook is a veri good fellow, but pulpi; he will run intoani mould, but he won’t keep shape.”“he might keep shape long enough to defer the marriag,” said sirjam.“but, my dear chettam, why should i us my influenc to casaubon’sdisadvantag, unless i were much surer than i am that i should beact for the advantag of miss brook? i know no harm of casaubon. idon’t care about hi xisuthru and fee-fo-fum and the rest; but then hedoesn’t care about my fish-tackl. as to the line he took on thecathol question, that wa unexpect; but he ha alwai been civil tome, and i don’t see why i should spoil hi sport. for anyth i cantel, miss brook mai be happier with him than she would be with anyoth man.”“humphrei! i have no patienc with you. you know you would rather dineund the hedg than with casaubon alon. you have noth to sai toeach other.”“what ha that to do with miss brook’s marri him? she doe not doit for my amus.”“he ha got no good red blood in hi bodi,” said sir jame.“no. somebodi put a drop under a magnifi-glass and it wa allsemicolon and parenthes,” said mr. cadwallad.“why doe he not bring out hi book, instead of marri,” said sirjam, with a disgust which he held warrant by the sound feel ofan english layman.“oh, he dream footnot, and thei run awai with all hi brain. theysai, when he wa a littl boi, he made an abstract of ‘hop o’ mythumb,’ and he ha been make abstract ever sinc. ugh! and that isth man humphrei goe on sai that a woman mai be happi with.”“well, he is what miss brook like,” said the rector. “i don’t professto understand everi young ladi’s tast.”“but if she were your own daughter?” said sir jame.“that would be a differ affair. she is _not_ my daughter, and idon’t feel call upon to interfer. casaubon is as good as most of us.he is a scholarli clergyman, and credit to the cloth. some radicalfellow speechifi at middlemarch said casaubon wa the learnedstraw-chop incumb, and freke wa the brick-and-mortar incumb,and i wa the angl incumb. and upon my word, i don’t see that onei wors or better than the other.” the rector end with hi silentlaugh. he alwai saw the joke of ani satir against himself. hisconsci wa larg and easi, like the rest of him: it did onli whatit could do without ani troubl.clearli, there would be no interfer with miss brook’s marriagethrough mr. cadwallad; and sir jame felt with some sad that shewa to have perfect liberti of misjudg. it wa a sign of hi gooddisposit that he did not slacken at all in hi intent of carryingout dorothea’s design of the cottag. doubtless thi persist wasth best cours for hi own digniti: but pride onli help us to begener; it never make us so, ani more than vaniti make us witti.she wa now enough awar of sir jame’s posit with regard to her, toappreci the rectitud of hi persever in a landlord’s duti, towhich he had at first been urg by a lover’s complais, and herpleasur in it wa great enough to count for someth even in herpres happi. perhap she gave to sir jame chettam’s cottag allth interest she could spare from mr. casaubon, or rather from thesymphoni of hope dream, admir trust, and passion selfdevot which that learn gentleman had set plai in her soul.henc it happen that in the good baronet’s succeed visit, whileh wa begin to pai small attent to celia, he found himselftalk with more and more pleasur to dorothea. she wa perfectlyunconstrain and without irrit toward him now, and he wasgradu discov the delight there is in frank kind andcompanionship between a man and a woman who have no passion to hide orconfess.chapter ix.1_st gent_. an ancient land in ancient oracl is call “law-thirsti”: all the struggl there wa after order and a perfect rule. prai, where lie such land now? . . .2_d gent_. why, where thei lai of old—in human soul.mr. casaubon’s behavior about settlement wa highli satisfactori tomr. brook, and the preliminari of marriag roll smoothli along,shorten the week of courtship. the betroth bride must see herfutur home, and dictat ani chang that she would like to have madether. a woman dictat befor marriag in order that she mai have anappetit for submiss afterward. and certainli, the mistak that wemal and femal mortal make when we have our own wai might fairlyrais some wonder that we ar so fond of it.on a grai but dry novemb morn dorothea drove to lowick in companywith her uncl and celia. mr. casaubon’s home wa the manor-hous.close by, visibl from some part of the garden, wa the littl church,with the old parsonag opposit. in the begin of hi career, mr.casaubon had onli held the live, but the death of hi brother had puthim in possess of the manor also. it had a small park, with a fineold oak here and there, and an avenu of lime toward the southwestfront, with a sunk fenc between park and pleasur-ground, so that fromth draw-room window the glanc swept uninterruptedli along a slopeof greensward till the lime end in a level of corn and pastur,which often seem to melt into a lake under the set sun. thi wasth happi side of the hous, for the south and east look rathermelancholi even under the brightest morn. the ground here were moreconfin, the flower-bed show no veri care tendanc, and largeclump of tree, chiefli of sombr yew, had risen high, not ten yardsfrom the window. the build, of greenish stone, wa in the oldenglish style, not ugli, but small-window and melancholi-look: thesort of hous that must have children, mani flower, open window, andlittl vista of bright thing, to make it seem a joyou home. in thislatt end of autumn, with a spars remnant of yellow leav fallingslowli athwart the dark evergreen in a still without sunshin, thehous too had an air of autumn declin, and mr. casaubon, when hepres himself, had no bloom that could be thrown into relief bythat background.“oh dear!” celia said to herself, “i am sure freshitt hall would havebeen pleasant than thi.” she thought of the white freeston, thepillar portico, and the terrac full of flower, sir jame smilingabov them like a princ issu from hi enchant in a rose-bush,with a handkerchief swiftli metamorphos from the most delicatelyodor petal—sir jame, who talk so agreeabl, alwai about thingswhich had common-sens in them, and not about learn! celia had thoselight young feminin tast which grave and weatherworn gentlemensometim prefer in a wife; but happili mr. casaubon’s bia had beendiffer, for he would have had no chanc with celia.dorothea, on the contrari, found the hous and ground all that shecould wish: the dark book-shelv in the long librari, the carpet andcurtain with color subdu by time, the curiou old map andbird’s-ey view on the wall of the corridor, with here and there anold vase below, had no oppress for her, and seem more cheerfulthan the cast and pictur at the grang, which her uncl had long agobrought home from hi travel—thei be probabl among the idea hehad taken in at on time. to poor dorothea these sever classicalnud and smirk renaiss-correggios were painfullyinexplic, stare into the midst of her puritan concept: shehad never been taught how she could bring them into ani sort ofrelev with her life. but the owner of lowick appar had notbeen travel, and mr. casaubon’s studi of the past were notcarri on by mean of such aid.dorothea walk about the hous with delight emot. everythingseem hallow to her: thi wa to be the home of her wifehood, andsh look up with ey full of confid to mr. casaubon when he drewher attent special to some actual arrang and ask her if shewould like an alter. all appeal to her tast she met gratefulli,but saw noth to alter. hi effort at exact courtesi and formaltend had no defect for her. she fill up all blank withunmanifest perfect, interpret him as she interpret the worksof provid, and account for seem discord by her own deafnessto the higher harmoni. and there ar mani blank left in the week ofcourtship which a love faith fill with happi assur.“now, my dear dorothea, i wish you to favor me by point out whichroom you would like to have as your boudoir,” said mr. casaubon,show that hi view of the womanli natur were suffici larg toinclud that requir.“it is veri kind of you to think of that,” said dorothea, “but i assurey i would rather have all those matter decid for me. i shall bemuch happier to take everyth as it is—just as you have been us tohav it, or as you will yourself choos it to be. i have no motiv forwish anyth els.”“oh, dodo,” said celia, “will you not have the bow-window roomup-stair?”mr. casaubon led the wai thither. the bow-window look down the avenueof lime; the furnitur wa all of a fade blue, and there wereminiatur of ladi and gentlemen with powder hair hang in agroup. a piec of tapestri over a door also show a blue-green worldwith a pale stag in it. the chair and tabl were thin-leg and easyto upset. it wa a room where on might fanci the ghost of atight-lace ladi revisit the scene of her embroideri. a lightbookcas contain duodecimo volum of polit literatur in calf,complet the furnitur.“ye,” said mr. brook, “thi would be a pretti room with some newhang, sofa, and that sort of thing. a littl bare now.”“no, uncl,” said dorothea, eagerli. “prai do not speak of alteringanyth. there ar so mani other thing in the world that wantalt—i like to take these thing as thei ar. and you like them asthei ar, don’t you?” she ad, look at mr. casaubon. “perhap thiswa your mother’s room when she wa young.”“it wa,” he said, with hi slow bend of the head.“thi is your mother,” said dorothea, who had turn to examin thegroup of miniatur. “it is like the tini on you brought me; onli, ishould think, a better portrait. and thi on opposit, who is thi?”“her elder sister. thei were, like you and your sister, the onli twochildren of their parent, who hang abov them, you see.”“the sister is pretti,” said celia, impli that she thought lessfavor of mr. casaubon’s mother. it wa a new open to celia’simagin, that he came of a famili who had all been young in theirtim—the ladi wear necklac.“it is a peculiar face,” said dorothea, look close. “those deepgrai ey rather near togeth—and the delic irregular nose with asort of rippl in it—and all the powder curl hang backward.altogeth it seem to me peculiar rather than pretti. there is noteven a famili like between her and your mother.”“no. and thei were not alik in their lot.”“you did not mention her to me,” said dorothea.“my aunt made an unfortun marriag. i never saw her.”dorothea wonder a littl, but felt that it would be indel justthen to ask for ani inform which mr. casaubon did not proffer, andsh turn to the window to admir the view. the sun had late piercedth grai, and the avenu of lime cast shadow.“shall we not walk in the garden now?” said dorothea.“and you would like to see the church, you know,” said mr. brook. “iti a droll littl church. and the villag. it all li in a nut-shell.by the wai, it will suit you, dorothea; for the cottag ar like a rowof alm-hous—littl garden, gilli-flower, that sort of thing.”“ye, pleas,” said dorothea, look at mr. casaubon, “i should liketo see all that.” she had got noth from him more graphic about thelowick cottag than that thei were “not bad.”thei were soon on a gravel walk which led chiefli between grassybord and clump of tree, thi be the nearest wai to the church,mr. casaubon said. at the littl gate lead into the churchyard therewa a paus while mr. casaubon went to the parsonag close by to fetcha kei. celia, who had been hang a littl in the rear, came uppres, when she saw that mr. casaubon wa gone awai, and said inher easi staccato, which alwai seem to contradict the suspicion ofani malici intent—“do you know, dorothea, i saw some on quit young come up on of thewalk.”“is that astonish, celia?”“there mai be a young garden, you know—why not?” said mr. brook. “itold casaubon he should chang hi garden.”“no, not a garden,” said celia; “a gentleman with a sketch-book. hehad light-brown curl. i onli saw hi back. but he wa quit young.”“the curat’s son, perhap,” said mr. brook. “ah, there is casaubonagain, and tucker with him. he is go to introduc tucker. you don’tknow tucker yet.”mr. tucker wa the middl-ag curat, on of the “inferior clergi,”who ar usual not want in son. but after the introduct, theconvers did not lead to ani question about hi famili, and thestartl apparit of youth wa forgotten by everi on butcelia. she inwardli declin to believ that the light-brown curl andslim figur could have ani relationship to mr. tucker, who wa just asold and musti-look as she would have expect mr. casaubon’s curateto be; doubtless an excel man who would go to heaven (for celiawish not to be unprincipl), but the corner of hi mouth were sounpleas. celia thought with some dismal of the time she shouldhav to spend as bridesmaid at lowick, while the curat had probabl nopretti littl children whom she could like, irrespect of principl.mr. tucker wa invalu in their walk; and perhap mr. casaubon hadnot been without foresight on thi head, the curat be abl toanswer all dorothea’s question about the villag and the otherparishion. everybodi, he assur her, wa well off in lowick: not acottag in those doubl cottag at a low rent but kept a pig, and thestrip of garden at the back were well tend. the small boi woreexcel corduroi, the girl went out as tidi servant, or did alittl straw-plait at home: no loom here, no dissent; and thoughth public disposit wa rather toward lai by monei than towardsspiritu, there wa not much vice. the speckl fowl were sonumer that mr. brook observ, “your farmer leav some barlei forth women to glean, i see. the poor folk here might have a fowl intheir pot, as the good french king us to wish for all hi peopl. thefrench eat a good mani fowl—skinni fowl, you know.”“i think it wa a veri cheap wish of hi,” said dorothea, indignantli.“ar king such monster that a wish like that must be reckon a royalvirtu?”“and if he wish them a skinni fowl,” said celia, “that would not benic. but perhap he wish them to have fat fowl.”“ye, but the word ha drop out of the text, or perhap wassubauditum; that is, present in the king’s mind, but not utter,” saidmr. casaubon, smile and bend hi head toward celia, whoimmedi drop backward a littl, becaus she could not bear mr.casaubon to blink at her.dorothea sank into silenc on the wai back to the hous. she felt somedisappoint, of which she wa yet asham, that there wa nothingfor her to do in lowick; and in the next few minut her mind hadglanc over the possibl, which she would have prefer, offind that her home would be in a parish which had a larger share ofth world’s miseri, so that she might have had more activ duti init. then, recur to the futur actual befor her, she made apictur of more complet devot to mr. casaubon’s aim in which shewould await new duti. mani such might reveal themselv to the higherknowledg gain by her in that companionship.mr. tucker soon left them, have some cleric work which would notallow him to lunch at the hall; and as thei were re-enter the gardenthrough the littl gate, mr. casaubon said—“you seem a littl sad, dorothea. i trust you ar pleas with what youhav seen.”“i am feel someth which is perhap foolish and wrong,” answereddorothea, with her usual open—“almost wish that the peoplew more to be done for them here. i have known so few wai ofmak my life good for anyth. of cours, my notion of usefulnessmust be narrow. i must learn new wai of help peopl.”“doubtless,” said mr. casaubon. “each posit ha it correspondingduti. your, i trust, as the mistress of lowick, will not leav anyyearn unfulfil.”“inde, i believ that,” said dorothea, earnestli. “do not supposethat i am sad.”“that is well. but, if you ar not tire, we will take anoth wai toth hous than that by which we came.”dorothea wa not at all tire, and a littl circuit wa made toward afin yew-tree, the chief hereditari glori of the ground on thi sideof the hous. as thei approach it, a figur, conspicu on a darkbackground of evergreen, wa seat on a bench, sketch the oldtre. mr. brook, who wa walk in front with celia, turn hi head,and said—“who is that youngster, casaubon?”thei had come veri near when mr. casaubon answer—“that is a young rel of mine, a second cousin: the grandson, infact,” he ad, look at dorothea, “of the ladi whose portrait youhav been notic, my aunt julia.”the young man had laid down hi sketch-book and risen. hi bushylight-brown curl, as well as hi youth, identifi him at oncewith celia’s apparit.“dorothea, let me introduc to you my cousin, mr. ladislaw. will, thisi miss brook.”the cousin wa so close now, that, when he lift hi hat, dorotheacould see a pair of grai ey rather near togeth, a delicateirregular nose with a littl rippl in it, and hair fall backward;but there wa a mouth and chin of a more promin, threaten aspectthan belong to the type of the grandmoth’s miniatur. youngladislaw did not feel it necessari to smile, as if he were charm withthi introduct to hi futur second cousin and her rel; butwor rather a pout air of discont.“you ar an artist, i see,” said mr. brook, take up the sketch-bookand turn it over in hi unceremoni fashion.“no, i onli sketch a littl. there is noth fit to be seen there,”said young ladislaw, color, perhap with temper rather than modesti.“oh, come, thi is a nice bit, now. i did a littl in thi wai myselfat on time, you know. look here, now; thi is what i call a niceth, done with what we us to call _brio_.” mr. brook held outtoward the two girl a larg color sketch of stoni ground and tree,with a pool.“i am no judg of these thing,” said dorothea, not coldli, but with aneag deprec of the appeal to her. “you know, uncl, i never seeth beauti of those pictur which you sai ar so much prais. theyar a languag i do not understand. i suppos there is some relationbetween pictur and natur which i am too ignor to feel—just as youse what a greek sentenc stand for which mean noth to me.”dorothea look up at mr. casaubon, who bow hi head toward her,while mr. brook said, smile nonchalantli—“bless me, now, how differ peopl ar! but you had a bad style ofteach, you know—els thi is just the thing for girl—sketch,fine art and so on. but you took to draw plan; you don’t understand_morbidezza_, and that kind of thing. you will come to my hous, ihop, and i will show you what i did in thi wai,” he continu,turn to young ladislaw, who had to be recal from hispreoccup in observ dorothea. ladislaw had made up hi mind thatsh must be an unpleas girl, sinc she wa go to marri casaubon,and what she said of her stupid about pictur would have confirmedthat opinion even if he had believ her. as it wa, he took her wordsfor a covert judgment, and wa certain that she thought hi sketchdetest. there wa too much clever in her apolog: she waslaugh both at her uncl and himself. but what a voic! it wa liketh voic of a soul that had onc live in an aeolian harp. thi mustb on of natur’s inconsist. there could be no sort of passionin a girl who would marri casaubon. but he turn from her, and bowedhi thank for mr. brook’s invit.“we will turn over my italian engrav togeth,” continu thatgood-natur man. “i have no end of those thing, that i have laid byfor year. on get rusti in thi part of the countri, you know. notyou, casaubon; you stick to your studi; but my best idea getundermost—out of us, you know. you clever young men must guard againstindol. i wa too indol, you know: els i might have beenanywher at on time.”“that is a season admonit,” said mr. casaubon; “but now we willpass on to the hous, lest the young ladi should be tire ofstand.”when their back were turn, young ladislaw sat down to go on with hissketch, and as he did so hi face broke into an express ofamus which increas as he went on draw, till at last he threwback hi head and laugh aloud. partli it wa the recept of hi ownartist product that tickl him; partli the notion of hi gravecousin as the lover of that girl; and partli mr. brook’s definit ofth place he might have held but for the impedi of indol. mr.will ladislaw’s sens of the ludicr lit up hi featur veryagre: it wa the pure enjoy of comic, and had no mixtureof sneer and self-exalt.“what is your nephew go to do with himself, casaubon?” said mr.brook, as thei went on.“my cousin, you mean—not my nephew.”“ye, ye, cousin. but in the wai of a career, you know.”“the answer to that question is painfulli doubt. on leav rugbi hedeclin to go to an english univers, where i would gladli haveplac him, and chose what i must consid the anomal cours ofstudi at heidelberg. and now he want to go abroad again, withoutani special object, save the vagu purpos of what he call cultur,prepar for he know not what. he declin to choos a profess.”“he ha no mean but what you furnish, i suppos.”“i have alwai given him and hi friend reason to understand that iwould furnish in moder what wa necessari for provid him with ascholarli educ, and launch him respect. i am thereforebound to fulfil the expect so rais,” said mr. casaubon, puttinghi conduct in the light of mere rectitud: a trait of delicaci whichdorothea notic with admir.“he ha a thirst for travel; perhap he mai turn out a bruce or amungo park,” said mr. brook. “i had a notion of that myself at onetim.”“no, he ha no bent toward explor, or the enlarg of ourgeognosi: that would be a special purpos which i could recogn withsom approb, though without felicit him on a career which sooften end in prematur and violent death. but so far is he from havingani desir for a more accur knowledg of the earth’s surfac, thath said he should prefer not to know the sourc of the nile, and thatther should be some unknown region preserv as hunt ground forth poetic imagin.”“well, there is someth in that, you know,” said mr. brook, who hadcertainli an imparti mind.“it is, i fear, noth more than a part of hi gener inaccuraci andindisposit to thorough of all kind, which would be a bad auguryfor him in ani profess, civil or sacr, even were he so farsubmiss to ordinari rule as to choos on.”“perhap he ha conscienti scrupl found on hi own unfit,”said dorothea, who wa interest herself in find a favorableexplan. “becaus the law and medicin should be veri seriousprofess to undertak, should thei not? peopl’s live and fortunesdepend on them.”“doubtless; but i fear that my young rel will ladislaw is chieflydetermin in hi avers to these call by a dislik to steadyappl, and to that kind of acquir which is needfulinstrument, but is not charm or immedi invit toself-indulg tast. i have insist to him on what aristotl hasstat with admir breviti, that for the achiev of ani workregard as an end there must be a prior exercis of mani energi oracquir facil of a secondari order, demand patienc. i havepoint to my own manuscript volum, which repres the toil of yearspreparatori to a work not yet accomplish. but in vain. to carefulreason of thi kind he repli by call himself pegasu, and everyform of prescrib work ‘har.’”celia laugh. she wa surpris to find that mr. casaubon could saysometh quit amus.“well, you know, he mai turn out a byron, a chatterton, achurchil—that sort of thing—there’s no tell,” said mr. brook.“shall you let him go to itali, or wherev els he want to go?”“ye; i have agre to furnish him with moder suppli for a year orso; he ask no more. i shall let him be tri by the test of freedom.”“that is veri kind of you,” said dorothea, look up at mr. casaubonwith delight. “it is nobl. after all, peopl mai realli have in themsom vocat which is not quit plain to themselv, mai thei not?thei mai seem idl and weak becaus thei ar grow. we should be verypati with each other, i think.”“i suppos it is be engag to be marri that ha made you thinkpati good,” said celia, as soon as she and dorothea were alonetogeth, take off their wrap.“you mean that i am veri impati, celia.”“ye; when peopl don’t do and sai just what you like.” celia hadbecom less afraid of “sai thing” to dorothea sinc thisengag: clever seem to her more pitiabl than ever.chapter x.“he had catch a great cold, had he had no other cloth to wear thanth skin of a bear not yet kill.”—fuller.young ladislaw did not pai that visit to which mr. brook had invitedhim, and onli six dai afterward mr. casaubon mention that hi youngrel had start for the contin, seem by thi cold vaguenessto waiv inquiri. inde, will had declin to fix on ani more precisedestin than the entir area of europ. geniu, he held, isnecessarili intoler of fetter: on the on hand it must have theutmost plai for it spontan; on the other, it mai confid awaitthos messag from the univers which summon it to it peculiar work,onli place itself in an attitud of recept toward all sublimech. the attitud of recept ar variou, and will hadsincer tri mani of them. he wa not excess fond of wine, buth had sever time taken too much, simpli as an experi in thatform of ecstasi; he had fast till he wa faint, and then sup onlobst; he had made himself ill with dose of opium. noth greatlyorigin had result from these measur; and the effect of the opiumhad convinc him that there wa an entir dissimilar between hisconstitut and de quincei’s. the superad circumst which wouldevolv the geniu had not yet come; the univers had not yet beckon.even caesar’s fortun at on time wa but a grand presenti. we knowwhat a masquerad all develop is, and what effect shape mai bedisguis in helpless embryo. in fact, the world is full of hopefulanalog and handsom dubiou egg call possibl. will sawclearli enough the pitiabl instanc of long incub produc nochick, and but for gratitud would have laugh at casaubon, whoseplod applic, row of note-book, and small taper of learnedtheori explor the toss ruin of the world, seem to enforc amor entir encourag to will’s gener relianc on theintent of the univers with regard to himself. he held thatreli to be a mark of geniu; and certainli it is no mark to thecontrari; geniu consist neither in self-conceit nor in humil,but in a power to make or do, not anyth in gener, but someth inparticular. let him start for the contin, then, without ourpronounc on hi futur. among all form of mistak, propheci is themost gratuit.but at present thi caution against a too hasti judgment interest memor in relat to mr. casaubon than to hi young cousin. if todorothea mr. casaubon had been the mere occas which had set alightth fine inflamm materi of her youth illus, doe it followthat he wa fairli repres in the mind of those less impassionedpersonag who have hitherto deliv their judgment concern him?i protest against ani absolut conclus, ani prejudic deriv frommr. cadwallad’s contempt for a neighbor clergyman’s allegedgreat of soul, or sir jame chettam’s poor opinion of hi rival’sleg,—from mr. brook’s failur to elicit a companion’s idea, or fromcelia’s critic of a middl-ag scholar’s person appear. i amnot sure that the greatest man of hi ag, if ever that solitarysuperl exist, could escap these unfavor reflect ofhimself in variou small mirror; and even milton, look for hisportrait in a spoon, must submit to have the facial angl of a bumpkin.moreov, if mr. casaubon, speak for himself, ha rather a chillingrhetor, it is not therefor certain that there is no good work orfin feel in him. did not an immort physicist and interpret ofhieroglyph write detest vers? ha the theori of the solar systembeen advanc by grace manner and convers tact? suppos weturn from outsid estim of a man, to wonder, with keener interest,what is the report of hi own conscious about hi do orcapac: with what hindranc he is carri on hi daili labor; whatfad of hope, or what deeper fixiti of self-delus the year aremark off within him; and with what spirit he wrestl againstunivers pressur, which will on dai be too heavi for him, and bringhi heart to it final paus. doubtless hi lot is import in hi owney; and the chief reason that we think he ask too larg a place inour consider must be our want of room for him, sinc we refer himto the divin regard with perfect confid; nai, it is even heldsublim for our neighbor to expect the utmost there, howev littl hemai have got from us. mr. casaubon, too, wa the centr of hi ownworld; if he wa liabl to think that other were providenti madefor him, and especi to consid them in the light of their fitnessfor the author of a “kei to all mytholog,” thi trait is not quitealien to us, and, like the other mendic hope of mortal, claimssom of our piti.certainli thi affair of hi marriag with miss brook touch him morenearli than it did ani on of the person who have hitherto shown theirdisapprov of it, and in the present stage of thing i feel moretenderli toward hi experi of success than toward thedisappoint of the amiabl sir jame. for in truth, as the dai fixedfor hi marriag came nearer, mr. casaubon did not find hi spiritsris; nor did the contempl of that matrimoni garden scene,where, as all experi show, the path wa to be border withflow, prove persist more enchant to him than the accustomedvault where he walk taper in hand. he did not confess to himself,still less could he have breath to anoth, hi surpris that thoughh had won a love and nobl-heart girl he had not wondelight,—which he had also regard as an object to be found by search.it is true that he knew all the classic passag impli thecontrari; but know classic passag, we find, is a mode of motion,which explain why thei leav so littl extra forc for their personalappl.poor mr. casaubon had imagin that hi long studiou bachelorhood hadstor up for him a compound interest of enjoy, and that largedraft on hi affect would not fail to be honor; for we all ofu, grave or light, get our thought entangl in metaphor, and actfat on the strength of them. and now he wa in danger of beingsadden by the veri convict that hi circumst were unusuallyhappi: there wa noth extern by which he could account for acertain blank of sensibl which came over him just when hisexpect glad should have been most live, just when he exchangedth accustom dul of hi lowick librari for hi visit to thegrang. here wa a weari experi in which he wa as utterlycondemn to loneli as in the despair which sometim threatenedhim while toil in the morass of authorship without seem nearer toth goal. and hi wa that worst loneli which would shrink fromsympathi. he could not but wish that dorothea should think him not lesshappi than the world would expect her success suitor to be; and inrel to hi authorship he lean on her young trust and vener,he like to draw forth her fresh interest in listen, as a mean ofencourag to himself: in talk to her he present all hisperform and intent with the reflect confid of thepedagogu, and rid himself for the time of that chill ideal audiencewhich crowd hi labori uncr hour with the vapor pressureof tartarean shade.for to dorothea, after that toi-box histori of the world adapt toyoung ladi which had made the chief part of her educ, mr.casaubon’s talk about hi great book wa full of new vista; and thissens of revel, thi surpris of a nearer introduct to stoicsand alexandrian, as peopl who had idea not total unlik her own,kept in abey for the time her usual eager for a bind theorywhich could bring her own life and doctrin into strict connect withthat amaz past, and give the remotest sourc of knowledg somebear on her action. that more complet teach would come—mr.casaubon would tell her all that: she wa look forward to higheriniti in idea, as she wa look forward to marriag, andblend her dim concept of both. it would be a great mistak tosuppos that dorothea would have care about ani share in mr.casaubon’s learn as mere accomplish; for though opinion in theneighborhood of freshitt and tipton had pronounc her clever, thatepithet would not have describ her to circl in whose more precisevocabulari clever impli mere aptitud for know and do,apart from charact. all her eager for acquir lai within thatful current of sympathet motiv in which her idea and impuls werehabitu swept along. she did not want to deck herself withknowledg—to wear it loos from the nerv and blood that fed heract; and if she had written a book she must have done it as sainttheresa did, under the command of an author that constrain herconsci. but someth she yearn for by which her life might befil with action at onc ration and ardent; and sinc the time wasgon by for guid vision and spiritu director, sinc prayerheighten yearn but not instruct, what lamp wa there butknowledg? sure learn men kept the onli oil; and who more learnedthan mr. casaubon?thu in these brief week dorothea’s joyou grate expect wasunbroken, and howev her lover might occasion be consciou offlat, he could never refer it to ani slacken of her affectionateinterest.the season wa mild enough to encourag the project of extend thewed journei as far as rome, and mr. casaubon wa anxiou for thisbecaus he wish to inspect some manuscript in the vatican.“i still regret that your sister is not to accompani us,” he said onemorn, some time after it had been ascertain that celia object togo, and that dorothea did not wish for her companionship. “you willhav mani lone hour, dorothea, for i shall be constrain to maketh utmost us of my time dure our stai in rome, and i should feelmor at liberti if you had a companion.”the word “i should feel more at liberti” grate on dorothea. for thefirst time in speak to mr. casaubon she color from annoy.“you must have misunderstood me veri much,” she said, “if you think ishould not enter into the valu of your time—if you think that i shouldnot willingli give up whatev interf with your us it to thebest purpos.”“that is veri amiabl in you, my dear dorothea,” said mr. casaubon, notin the least notic that she wa hurt; “but if you had a ladi as yourcompanion, i could put you both under the care of a ciceron, and wecould thu achiev two purpos in the same space of time.”“i beg you will not refer to thi again,” said dorothea, ratherhaughtili. but immedi she fear that she wa wrong, and turningtoward him she laid her hand on hi, ad in a differ tone, “praydo not be anxiou about me. i shall have so much to think of when i amalon. and tantripp will be a suffici companion, just to take careof me. i could not bear to have celia: she would be miser.”it wa time to dress. there wa to be a dinner-parti that dai, the lastof the parti which were held at the grang as proper preliminari toth wed, and dorothea wa glad of a reason for move awai at onceon the sound of the bell, as if she need more than her usual amountof prepar. she wa asham of be irrit from some caus shecould not defin even to herself; for though she had no intent to beuntruth, her repli had not touch the real hurt within her. mr.casaubon’s word had been quit reason, yet thei had brought avagu instantan sens of aloof on hi part.“sure i am in a strang selfish weak state of mind,” she said toherself. “how can i have a husband who is so much abov me withoutknow that he need me less than i need him?”have convinc herself that mr. casaubon wa altogeth right, sherecov her equanim, and wa an agreeabl imag of seren dignitywhen she came into the draw-room in her silver-grai dress—the simplelin of her dark-brown hair part over her brow and coil massivelybehind, in keep with the entir absenc from her manner andexpress of all search after mere effect. sometim when dorothea wasin compani, there seem to be as complet an air of repos about hera if she had been a pictur of santa barbara look out from hertow into the clear air; but these interv of quietud made theenergi of her speech and emot the more remark when some outwardapp had touch her.she wa natur the subject of mani observ thi even, forth dinner-parti wa larg and rather more miscellan as to the maleport than ani which had been held at the grang sinc mr. brook’sniec had resid with him, so that the talk wa done in duo andtrio more or less inharmoni. there wa the newli elect mayor ofmiddlemarch, who happen to be a manufactur; the philanthropicbank hi brother-in-law, who predomin so much in the town thatsom call him a methodist, other a hypocrit, accord to theresourc of their vocabulari; and there were variou profession men.in fact, mr. cadwallad said that brook wa begin to treat themiddlemarch, and that she prefer the farmer at the tith-dinner,who drank her health unpretenti, and were not asham of theirgrandfath’ furnitur. for in that part of the countri, befor reformhad done it notabl part in develop the polit conscious,there wa a clearer distinct of rank and a dimmer distinct ofparti; so that mr. brook’s miscellan invit seem tobelong to that gener laxiti which came from hi inordin travel andhabit of take too much in the form of idea.alreadi, as miss brook pass out of the dine-room, opportun wasfound for some interject “asid.”“a fine woman, miss brook! an uncommonli fine woman, by god!” said mr.standish, the old lawyer, who had been so long concern with theland gentri that he had becom land himself, and us that oath ina deep-mouth manner as a sort of armori bear, stamp thespeech of a man who held a good posit.mr. bulstrod, the banker, seem to be address, but that gentlemandislik coars and profan, and mere bow. the remark wastaken up by mr. chich, a middl-ag bachelor and coursingcelebr, who had a complexion someth like an easter egg, a fewhair carefulli arrang, and a carriag impli the conscious ofa distinguish appear.“ye, but not my style of woman: i like a woman who lai herself out alittl more to pleas us. there should be a littl filigre about awoman—someth of the coquett. a man like a sort of challeng. themor of a dead set she make at you the better.”“there’s some truth in that,” said mr. standish, dispos to be genial.“and, by god, it’s usual the wai with them. i suppos it answer somewis end: provid made them so, eh, bulstrod?”“i should be dispos to refer coquetri to anoth sourc,” said mr.bulstrod. “i should rather refer it to the devil.”“ay, to be sure, there should be a littl devil in a woman,” said mr.chich, whose studi of the fair sex seem to have been detrimentalto hi theologi. “and i like them blond, with a certain gait, and aswan neck. between ourselv, the mayor’s daughter is more to my tastethan miss brook or miss celia either. if i were a marri man ishould choos miss vinci befor either of them.”“well, make up, make up,” said mr. standish, jocos; “you see themiddl-ag fellow carri the dai.”mr. chich shook hi head with much mean: he wa not go toincur the certainti of be accept by the woman he would choos.the miss vinci who had the honor of be mr. chich’s ideal wa ofcours not present; for mr. brook, alwai object to go too far,would not have chosen that hi niec should meet the daughter of amiddlemarch manufactur, unless it were on a public occas. thefeminin part of the compani includ none whom ladi chettam or mr.cadwallad could object to; for mr. renfrew, the colonel’s widow, wasnot onli unexception in point of breed, but also interest onth ground of her complaint, which puzzl the doctor, and seemedclearli a case wherein the ful of profession knowledg might needth supplement of quackeri. ladi chettam, who attribut her ownremark health to home-made bitter unit with constant medicalattend, enter with much exercis of the imagin into mr.renfrew’s account of symptom, and into the amaz futil in hercas of all strengthen medicin.“where can all the strength of those medicin go, my dear?” said themild but state dowag, turn to mr. cadwallad reflect,when mr. renfrew’s attent wa call awai.“it strengthen the diseas,” said the rector’s wife, much toowel-born not to be an amateur in medicin. “everyth depend on theconstitut: some peopl make fat, some blood, and some bile—that’s myview of the matter; and whatev thei take is a sort of grist to themil.”“then she ought to take medicin that would reduc—reduc the diseas,you know, if you ar right, my dear. and i think what you sai isreason.”“certainli it is reason. you have two sort of potato, fed on thesam soil. on of them grow more and more wateri—”“ah! like thi poor mr. renfrew—that is what i think. dropsi! there isno swell yet—it is inward. i should sai she ought to take dryingmedicin, shouldn’t you?—or a dry hot-air bath. mani thing might betri, of a dry natur.”“let her try a certain person’s pamphlet,” said mr. cadwallad in anunderton, see the gentlemen enter. “he doe not want dry.”“who, my dear?” said ladi chettam, a charm woman, not so quick as tonullifi the pleasur of explan.“the bridegroom—casaubon. he ha certainli been dry up faster sinceth engag: the flame of passion, i suppos.”“i should think he is far from have a good constitut,” said ladychettam, with a still deeper underton. “and then hi studi—so verydri, as you sai.”“realli, by the side of sir jame, he look like a death’s head skinnedov for the occas. mark my word: in a year from thi time thatgirl will hate him. she look up to him as an oracl now, and by-and-bysh will be at the other extrem. all flighti!”“how veri shock! i fear she is headstrong. but tell me—you know allabout him—is there anyth veri bad? what is the truth?”“the truth? he is as bad as the wrong physic—nasti to take, and sure todisagre.”“there could not be anyth wors than that,” said ladi chettam, withso vivid a concept of the physic that she seem to have learnedsometh exact about mr. casaubon’s disadvantag. “howev, jameswil hear noth against miss brook. he sai she is the mirror ofwomen still.”“that is a gener make-believ of hi. depend upon it, he likeslittl celia better, and she appreci him. i hope you like my littlecelia?”“certainli; she is fonder of geranium, and seem more docil, thoughnot so fine a figur. but we were talk of physic. tell me about thisnew young surgeon, mr. lydgat. i am told he is wonderfulli clever: hecertainli look it—a fine brow inde.”“he is a gentleman. i heard him talk to humphrei. he talk well.”“ye. mr. brook sai he is on of the lydgat of northumberland,realli well connect. on doe not expect it in a practition of thatkind. for my own part, i like a medic man more on a foot with theserv; thei ar often all the clever. i assur you i found poorhick’s judgment unfail; i never knew him wrong. he wa coars andbutch-like, but he knew my constitut. it wa a loss to me hisgo off so suddenli. dear me, what a veri anim convers missbrook seem to be have with thi mr. lydgat!”“she is talk cottag and hospit with him,” said mr.cadwallad, whose ear and power of interpret were quick. “ibeliev he is a sort of philanthropist, so brook is sure to take himup.”“jame,” said ladi chettam when her son came near, “bring mr. lydgateand introduc him to me. i want to test him.”the affabl dowag declar herself delight with thi opportun ofmak mr. lydgat’s acquaint, have heard of hi success intreat fever on a new plan.mr. lydgat had the medic accomplish of look perfectli gravewhatev nonsens wa talk to him, and hi dark steadi ey gave himimpress as a listen. he wa as littl as possibl like thelament hick, especi in a certain careless refin about histoilet and utter. yet ladi chettam gather much confid in him.he confirm her view of her own constitut as be peculiar, byadmit that all constitut might be call peculiar, and he didnot deni that her might be more peculiar than other. he did notapprov of a too lower system, includ reckless cup, nor, onth other hand, of incess port wine and bark. he said “i think so”with an air of so much defer accompani the insight of agreement,that she form the most cordial opinion of hi talent.“i am quit pleas with your proteg,” she said to mr. brook beforego awai.“my proteg?—dear me!—who is that?” said mr. brook.“thi young lydgat, the new doctor. he seem to me to understand hisprofess admir.”“oh, lydgat! he is not my proteg, you know; onli i knew an uncl ofhi who sent me a letter about him. howev, i think he is like to befirst-rate—ha studi in pari, knew broussai; ha idea, youknow—want to rais the profess.”“lydgat ha lot of idea, quit new, about ventil and diet, thatsort of thing,” resum mr. brook, after he had hand out ladychettam, and had return to be civil to a group of middlemarch.“hang it, do you think that is quit sound?—upset the oldtreat, which ha made englishmen what thei ar?” said mr. standish.“medic knowledg is at a low ebb among us,” said mr. bulstrod, whospok in a subdu tone, and had rather a sickli air. “i, for my part,hail the advent of mr. lydgat. i hope to find good reason forconfid the new hospit to hi manag.”“that is all veri fine,” repli mr. standish, who wa not fond of mr.bulstrod; “if you like him to try experi on your hospitalpati, and kill a few peopl for chariti i have no object. but iam not go to hand monei out of my purs to have experi tri onm. i like treatment that ha been test a littl.”“well, you know, standish, everi dose you take is an experi-anexperi, you know,” said mr. brook, nod toward the lawyer.“oh, if you talk in that sens!” said mr. standish, with as muchdisgust at such non-legal quibbl as a man can well betrai toward avalu client.“i should be glad of ani treatment that would cure me without reducingm to a skeleton, like poor grainger,” said mr. vinci, the mayor, aflorid man, who would have serv for a studi of flesh in strikingcontrast with the franciscan tint of mr. bulstrod. “it’s anuncommonli danger thing to be left without ani pad against theshaft of diseas, as somebodi said,—and i think it a veri goodexpress myself.”mr. lydgat, of cours, wa out of hear. he had quit the partyearli, and would have thought it altogeth tediou but for the noveltyof certain introduct, especi the introduct to miss brook,whose youth bloom, with her approach marriag to that fadedscholar, and her interest in matter social us, gave her thepiqu of an unusu combin.“she is a good creatur—that fine girl—but a littl too earnest,” hethought. “it is troublesom to talk to such women. thei ar alwaysw reason, yet thei ar too ignor to understand the merit ofani question, and usual fall back on their moral sens to settleth after their own tast.”evid miss brook wa not mr. lydgat’s style of woman ani morethan mr. chich’s. consid, inde, in relat to the latter,whose mind wa matur, she wa altogeth a mistak, and calcul toshock hi trust in final caus, includ the adapt of fine youngwomen to purplefac bachelor. but lydgat wa less ripe, and mightposs have experi befor him which would modifi hi opinion asto the most excel thing in woman.miss brook, howev, wa not again seen by either of these gentlemenund her maiden name. not long after that dinner-parti she had becomemr. casaubon, and wa on her wai to rome.chapter xi.but deed and languag such as men do us,and person such as comedi would choos,when she would show an imag of the time,and sport with human folli, not with crime.—ben jonson.lydgat, in fact, wa alreadi consciou of be fascin by a womanstrikingli differ from miss brook: he did not in the least supposethat he had lost hi balanc and fallen in love, but he had said ofthat particular woman, “she is grace itself; she is perfectli lovelyand accomplish. that is what a woman ought to be: she ought toproduc the effect of exquisit music.” plain women he regard as hedid the other sever fact of life, to be face with philosophi andinvestig by scienc. but rosamond vinci seem to have the truemelod charm; and when a man ha seen the woman whom he would havechosen if he had intend to marri speedili, hi remain a bachelorwil usual depend on her resolut rather than on hi. lydgatebeliev that he should not marri for sever year: not marri until hehad trodden out a good clear path for himself awai from the broad roadwhich wa quit readi made. he had seen miss vinci abov hi horizonalmost as long as it had taken mr. casaubon to becom engag andmarri: but thi learn gentleman wa possess of a fortun; he hadassembl hi volumin note, and had made that sort of reputationwhich preced perform,—often the larger part of a man’s fame. hetook a wife, as we have seen, to adorn the remain quadrant of hiscours, and be a littl moon that would caus hardli a calculableperturb. but lydgat wa young, poor, ambiti. he had hishalf-centuri befor him instead of behind him, and he had come tomiddlemarch bent on do mani thing that were not directli fit tomak hi fortun or even secur him a good incom. to a man under suchcircumst, take a wife is someth more than a question ofadorn, howev highli he mai rate thi; and lydgat wa dispos togiv it the first place among wife function. to hi tast, guid bya singl convers, here wa the point on which miss brook would befound want, notwithstand her undeni beauti. she did not lookat thing from the proper feminin angl. the societi of such women wasabout as relax as go from your work to teach the second form,instead of reclin in a paradis with sweet laugh for bird-note,and blue ey for a heaven.certainli noth at present could seem much less import to lydgatethan the turn of miss brook’s mind, or to miss brook than thequal of the woman who had attract thi young surgeon. but anyon watch keenli the stealthi converg of human lot, see a slowprepar of effect from on life on anoth, which tell like acalcul ironi on the indiffer or the frozen stare with which welook at our unintroduc neighbor. destini stand by sarcast with ourdramati persona fold in her hand.old provinci societi had it share of thi subtl movement: had notonli it strike downfal, it brilliant young profession dandieswho end by live up an entri with a drab and six children for theirestablish, but also those less mark vicissitud which areconstantli shift the boundari of social intercours, and begettingnew conscious of interdepend. some slip a littl downward,some got higher foot: peopl deni aspir, gain wealth, andfastidi gentlemen stood for borough; some were caught in politicalcurr, some in ecclesiast, and perhap found themselvessurprisingli group in consequ; while a few personag or familiesthat stood with rocki firm amid all thi fluctuat, were slowlypres new aspect in spite of solid, and alter with thedoubl chang of self and behold. municip town and rural parishgradu made fresh thread of connect—gradual, as the oldstock gave wai to the save-bank, and the worship of the solarguinea becam extinct; while squir and baronet, and even lord whohad onc live blamelessli afar from the civic mind, gather thefaulti of closer acquaintanceship. settler, too, came from distantcounti, some with an alarm novelti of skill, other with anoffens advantag in cun. in fact, much the same sort of movementand mixtur went on in old england as we find in older herodotu, whoalso, in tell what had been, thought it well to take a woman’s lotfor hi start-point; though io, as a maiden appar beguil byattract merchandis, wa the revers of miss brook, and in thisrespect perhap bore more resembl to rosamond vinci, who hadexcel tast in costum, with that nymph-like figur and pureblind which give the largest rang to choic in the flow and colorof draperi. but these thing made onli part of her charm. she wasadmit to be the flower of mr. lemon’s school, the chief school inth counti, where the teach includ all that wa demand in theaccomplish femal—even to extra, such as the get in and out of acarriag. mr. lemon herself had alwai held up miss vinci as anexampl: no pupil, she said, exceed that young ladi for mentalacquisit and proprieti of speech, while her music execut wasquit except. we cannot help the wai in which peopl speak of us,and probabl if mr. lemon had undertaken to describ juliet or imogen,these heroin would not have seem poetic. the first vision ofrosamond would have been enough with most judg to dispel anyprejudic excit by mr. lemon’s prais.lydgat could not be long in middlemarch without have that agreeablevis, or even without make the acquaint of the vinci famili;for though mr. peacock, whose practic he had paid someth to enteron, had not been their doctor (mr. vinci not like the loweringsystem adopt by him), he had mani patient among their connectionsand acquaint. for who of ani consequ in middlemarch wa notconnect or at least acquaint with the vinci? thei were oldmanufactur, and had kept a good hous for three gener, inwhich there had natur been much intermarri with neighbor moreor less decidedli genteel. mr. vinci’s sister had made a wealthi matchin accept mr. bulstrod, who, howev, as a man not born in thetown, and altogeth of dimli known origin, wa consid to have donewel in unit himself with a real middlemarch famili; on the otherhand, mr. vinci had descend a littl, have taken an innkeep’sdaughter. but on thi side too there wa a cheer sens of monei; formr. vinci’s sister had been second wife to rich old mr. featherston,and had di childless year ago, so that her nephew and niec mightb suppos to touch the affect of the widow. and it happenedthat mr. bulstrod and mr. featherston, two of peacock’s mostimport patient, had, from differ caus, given an especiallygood recept to hi successor, who had rais some partisanship aswel as discuss. mr. wrench, medic attend to the vinci famili,veri earli had ground for think lightli of lydgat’s professionaldiscret, and there wa no report about him which wa not retail atth vinci’, where visitor were frequent. mr. vinci wa more inclinedto gener good-fellowship than to take side, but there wa no needfor him to be hasti in make ani new man acquaint. rosamondsil wish that her father would invit mr. lydgat. she wa tiredof the face and figur she had alwai been us to—the variousirregular profil and gait and turn of phrase distinguish thosemiddlemarch young men whom she had known as boi. she had been atschool with girl of higher posit, whose brother, she felt sure, itwould have been possibl for her to be more interest in, than inthes inevit middlemarch companion. but she would not have chosento mention her wish to her father; and he, for hi part, wa in nohurri on the subject. an alderman about to be mayor must by-and-byenlarg hi dinner-parti, but at present there were plenti of guestsat hi well-spread tabl.that tabl often remain cover with the relic of the familybreakfast long after mr. vinci had gone with hi second son to thewarehous, and when miss morgan wa alreadi far on in morn lessonswith the younger girl in the schoolroom. it await the familylaggard, who found ani sort of inconveni (to other) lessdisagre than get up when he wa call. thi wa the case onemorn of the octob in which we have late seen mr. casaubonvisit the grang; and though the room wa a littl overh withth fire, which had sent the spaniel pant to a remot corner,rosamond, for some reason, continu to sit at her embroideri longerthan usual, now and then give herself a littl shake, and lai herwork on her knee to contempl it with an air of hesit weari.her mamma, who had return from an excurs to the kitchen, sat onth other side of the small work-tabl with an air of more entireplacid, until, the clock again give notic that it wa go tostrik, she look up from the lace-mend which wa occupi herplump finger and rang the bell.“knock at mr. fred’s door again, pritchard, and tell him it ha struckhalf-past ten.”thi wa said without ani chang in the radiant good-humor of mr.vinci’s face, in which forti-five year had delv neither angl norparallel; and push back her pink capstr, she let her work reston her lap, while she look admiringli at her daughter.“mamma,” said rosamond, “when fred come down i wish you would not lethim have red her. i cannot bear the smell of them all over thehous at thi hour of the morn.”“oh, my dear, you ar so hard on your brother! it is the onli fault ihav to find with you. you ar the sweetest temper in the world, butyou ar so tetchi with your brother.”“not tetchi, mamma: you never hear me speak in an unladylik wai.”“well, but you want to deni them thing.”“brother ar so unpleas.”“oh, my dear, you must allow for young men. be thank if thei havegood heart. a woman must learn to put up with littl thing. you willb marri some dai.”“not to ani on who is like fred.”“don’t decri your own brother, my dear. few young men have less againstthem, although he couldn’t take hi degre—i’m sure i can’t understandwhi, for he seem to me most clever. and you know yourself he wasthought equal to the best societi at colleg. so particular as you ar,my dear, i wonder you ar not glad to have such a gentlemanli young manfor a brother. you ar alwai find fault with bob becaus he is notfr.”“oh no, mamma, onli becaus he is bob.”“well, my dear, you will not find ani middlemarch young man who ha notsometh against him.”“but”—here rosamond’s face broke into a smile which suddenli revealedtwo dimpl. she herself thought unfavor of these dimpl andsmil littl in gener societi. “but i shall not marri anymiddlemarch young man.”“so it seem, my love, for you have as good as refus the pick ofthem; and if there’s better to be had, i’m sure there’s no girl betterdeserv it.”“excus me, mamma—i wish you would not sai, ‘the pick of them.’”“why, what els ar thei?”“i mean, mamma, it is rather a vulgar express.”“veri like, my dear; i never wa a good speaker. what should i sai?”“the best of them.”“why, that seem just as plain and common. if i had had time to think,i should have said, ‘the most superior young men.’ but with youreduc you must know.”“what must rosi know, mother?” said mr. fred, who had slid inunobserv through the half-open door while the ladi were bendingov their work, and now go up to the fire stood with hi backtoward it, warm the sole of hi slipper.“whether it’s right to sai ‘superior young men,’” said mr. vinci,ring the bell.“oh, there ar so mani superior tea and sugar now. superior isget to be shopkeep’ slang.”“ar you begin to dislik slang, then?” said rosamond, with mildgrav.“onli the wrong sort. all choic of word is slang. it mark a class.”“there is correct english: that is not slang.”“i beg your pardon: correct english is the slang of prig who writehistori and essai. and the strongest slang of all is the slang ofpoet.”“you will sai anyth, fred, to gain your point.”“well, tell me whether it is slang or poetri to call an ox a_leg-plaiter_.”“of cours you can call it poetri if you like.”“aha, miss rosi, you don’t know homer from slang. i shall invent a newgam; i shall write bit of slang and poetri on slip, and give them toyou to separ.”“dear me, how amus it is to hear young peopl talk!” said mr.vinci, with cheer admir.“have you got noth els for my breakfast, pritchard?” said fred, toth servant who brought in coffe and butter toast; while he walkedround the tabl survei the ham, pot beef, and other coldremn, with an air of silent reject, and polit forbear fromsign of disgust.“should you like egg, sir?”“egg, no! bring me a grill bone.”“realli, fred,” said rosamond, when the servant had left the room, “ifyou must have hot thing for breakfast, i wish you would come downearli. you can get up at six o’clock to go out hunt; i cannotunderstand why you find it so difficult to get up on other morn.”“that is your want of understand, rosi. i can get up to go huntingbecaus i like it.”“what would you think of me if i came down two hour after everi oneels and order grill bone?”“i should think you were an uncommonli fast young ladi,” said fred,eat hi toast with the utmost composur.“i cannot see why brother ar to make themselv disagre, anymor than sister.”“i don’t make myself disagre; it is you who find me so.disagre is a word that describ your feel and not myaction.”“i think it describ the smell of grill bone.”“not at all. it describ a sensat in your littl nose associatedwith certain finick notion which ar the classic of mr. lemon’sschool. look at my mother; you don’t see her object to everythingexcept what she doe herself. she is my notion of a pleasant woman.”“bless you both, my dear, and don’t quarrel,” said mr. vinci, withmotherli cordial. “come, fred, tell us all about the new doctor. howi your uncl pleas with him?”“pretti well, i think. he ask lydgat all sort of question and thenscrew up hi face while he hear the answer, as if thei were pinchinghi toe. that’s hi wai. ah, here come my grill bone.”“but how came you to stai out so late, my dear? you onli said you werego to your uncl’s.”“oh, i dine at plymdal’s. we had whist. lydgat wa there too.”“and what do you think of him? he is veri gentlemanli, i suppos. theysai he is of excel famili—hi relat quit counti peopl.”“ye,” said fred. “there wa a lydgat at john’s who spent no end ofmonei. i find thi man is a second cousin of hi. but rich men mai haveveri poor devil for second cousin.”“it alwai make a differ, though, to be of good famili,” saidrosamond, with a tone of decis which show that she had thought onthi subject. rosamond felt that she might have been happier if she hadnot been the daughter of a middlemarch manufactur. she dislikedanyth which remind her that her mother’s father had been aninnkeep. certainli ani on rememb the fact might think that mr.vinci had the air of a veri handsom good-humor landladi, accustomedto the most caprici order of gentlemen.“i thought it wa odd hi name wa tertiu,” said the bright-facedmatron, “but of cours it’s a name in the famili. but now, tell usexactli what sort of man he is.”“oh, tallish, dark, clever—talk well—rather a prig, i think.”“i never can make out what you mean by a prig,” said rosamond.“a fellow who want to show that he ha opinion.”“why, my dear, doctor must have opinion,” said mr. vinci. “what arethei there for els?”“ye, mother, the opinion thei ar paid for. but a prig is a fellowwho is alwai make you a present of hi opinion.”“i suppos mari garth admir mr. lydgat,” said rosamond, not withouta touch of innuendo.“realli, i can’t sai.” said fred, rather glumli, as he left the tabl,and take up a novel which he had brought down with him, threw himselfinto an arm-chair. “if you ar jealou of her, go often to stonecourt yourself and eclips her.”“i wish you would not be so vulgar, fred. if you have finish, prayr the bell.”“it is true, though—what your brother sai, rosamond,” mr. vincybegan, when the servant had clear the tabl. “it is a thousand pitiesy haven’t patienc to go and see your uncl more, so proud of you ash is, and want you to live with him. there’s no know what hemight have done for you as well as for fred. god know, i’m fond ofhav you at home with me, but i can part with my children for theirgood. and now it stand to reason that your uncl featherston will dosometh for mari garth.”“mari garth can bear be at stone court, becaus she like thatbett than be a gover,” said rosamond, fold up her work. “iwould rather not have anyth left to me if i must earn it by enduringmuch of my uncl’s cough and hi ugli relat.”“he can’t be long for thi world, my dear; i wouldn’t hasten hi end,but what with asthma and that inward complaint, let us hope there issometh better for him in anoth. and i have no ill-will towardsmari garth, but there’s justic to be thought of. and mr.featherston’s first wife brought him no monei, as my sister did. herniec and nephew can’t have so much claim as my sister’s. and i mustsai i think mari garth a dread plain girl—more fit for a gover.”“everi on would not agre with you there, mother,” said fred, whoseem to be abl to read and listen too.“well, my dear,” said mr. vinci, wheel skilfulli, “if she _had_some fortun left her,—a man marri hi wife’s relat, and thegarth ar so poor, and live in such a small wai. but i shall leav youto your studi, my dear; for i must go and do some shop.”“fred’s studi ar not veri deep,” said rosamond, rise with hermamma, “he is onli read a novel.”“well, well, by-and-by he’ll go to hi latin and thing,” said mr.vinci, soothingli, stroke her son’s head. “there’s a fire in thesmok-room on purpos. it’s your father’s wish, you know—fred, mydear—and i alwai tell him you will be good, and go to colleg again totak your degre.”fred drew hi mother’s hand down to hi lip, but said noth.“i suppos you ar not go out ride to-dai?” said rosamond,linger a littl after her mamma wa gone.“no; why?”“papa sai i mai have the chestnut to ride now.”“you can go with me to-morrow, if you like. onli i am go to stonecourt, rememb.”“i want to ride so much, it is indiffer to me where we go.” rosamondr wish to go to stone court, of all other place.“oh, i sai, rosi,” said fred, as she wa pass out of the room, “ifyou ar go to the piano, let me come and plai some air with you.”“prai do not ask me thi morn.”“why not thi morn?”“realli, fred, i wish you would leav off plai the flute. a manlook veri silli plai the flute. and you plai so out of tune.”“when next ani on make love to you, miss rosamond, i will tell himhow oblig you ar.”“why should you expect me to oblig you by hear you plai the flute,ani more than i should expect you to oblig me by not plai it?”“and why should you expect me to take you out ride?”thi question led to an adjust, for rosamond had set her mind onthat particular ride.so fred wa gratifi with nearli an hour’s practic of “ar hyd y no,”“ye bank and brae,” and other favorit air from hi “instructor onth flute;” a wheezi perform, into which he threw much ambit andan irrepress hope.chapter xii.he had more tow on hi distaffethan gervei knew.—chaucer.the ride to stone court, which fred and rosamond took the next morn,lai through a pretti bit of midland landscap, almost all meadow andpastur, with hedgerow still allow to grow in bushi beauti and tospread out coral fruit for the bird. littl detail gave each field aparticular physiognomi, dear to the ey that have look on them fromchildhood: the pool in the corner where the grass were dank and treeslean whisperingli; the great oak shadow a bare place inmid-pastur; the high bank where the ash-tree grew; the sudden slopeof the old marl-pit make a red background for the burdock; thehuddl roof and rick of the homestead without a traceabl wai ofapproach; the grai gate and fenc against the depth of the borderingwood; and the strai hovel, it old, old thatch full of mossi hill andvallei with wondrou modul of light and shadow such as we travelfar to see in later life, and see larger, but not more beauti. thesear the thing that make the gamut of joi in landscap to midland-bredsoul—the thing thei toddl among, or perhap learn by heartstand between their father’s knee while he drove leisur.but the road, even the byroad, wa excel; for lowick, as we haveseen, wa not a parish of muddi lane and poor tenant; and it wa intolowick parish that fred and rosamond enter after a coupl of mile’ride. anoth mile would bring them to stone court, and at the end ofth first half, the hous wa alreadi visibl, look as if it hadbeen arrest in it growth toward a stone mansion by an unexpectedbud of farm-build on it left flank, which had hinder it frombecom anyth more than the substanti dwell of a gentlemanfarm. it wa not the less agreeabl an object in the distanc for theclust of pinnacl corn-rick which balanc the fine row of walnutson the right.present it wa possibl to discern someth that might be a gig onth circular drive befor the front door.“dear me,” said rosamond, “i hope none of my uncl’s horribl relationsar there.”“thei ar, though. that is mr. waul’s gig—the last yellow gig left, ishould think. when i see mr. waul in it, i understand how yellow canhav been worn for mourn. that gig seem to me more funer than ahears. but then mr. waul alwai ha black crape on. how doe shemanag it, rosi? her friend can’t alwai be dy.”“i don’t know at all. and she is not in the least evangel,” saidrosamond, reflect, as if that religi point of view would havefulli account for perpetu crape. “and, not poor,” she ad, aftera moment’s paus.“no, by georg! thei ar as rich as jew, those waul andfeatherston; i mean, for peopl like them, who don’t want to spendanyth. and yet thei hang about my uncl like vultur, and areafraid of a farth go awai from their side of the famili. but ibeliev he hate them all.”the mr. waul who wa so far from be admir in the ey of thesedist connect, had happen to sai thi veri morn (not at allwith a defiant air, but in a low, muffl, neutral tone, as of a voiceheard through cotton wool) that she did not wish “to enjoi their goodopinion.” she wa seat, as she observ, on her own brother’s hearth,and had been jane featherston five-and-twenti year befor she hadbeen jane waul, which entitl her to speak when her own brother’sname had been made free with by those who had no right to it.“what ar you drive at there?” said mr. featherston, hold hisstick between hi knee and settl hi wig, while he gave her amomentari sharp glanc, which seem to react on him like a draught ofcold air and set him cough.mr. waul had to defer her answer till he wa quiet again, till marygarth had suppli him with fresh syrup, and he had begun to rub thegold knob of hi stick, look bitterli at the fire. it wa a brightfir, but it made no differ to the chill-look purplish tint ofmr. waul’s face, which wa as neutral as her voic; have merechink for ey, and lip that hardli move in speak.“the doctor can’t master that cough, brother. it’s just like what ihav; for i’m your own sister, constitut and everyth. but, as iwa sai, it’s a piti mr. vinci’s famili can’t be better conduct.”“tchah! you said noth o’ the sort. you said somebodi had made freewith my name.”“and no more than can be prove, if what everybodi sai is true. mybroth solomon tell me it’s the talk up and down in middlemarch howunsteadi young vinci is, and ha been forev gambl at billiardssinc home he came.”“nonsens! what’s a game at billiard? it’s a good gentlemanli game;and young vinci is not a clodhopp. if your son john took tobilliard, now, he’d make a fool of himself.”“your nephew john never took to billiard or ani other game, brother,and is far from lose hundr of pound, which, if what everybodysai is true, must be found somewher els than out of mr. vinci thefath’s pocket. for thei sai he’s been lose monei for year, thoughnobodi would think so, to see him go cours and keep open hous asthei do. and i’ve heard sai mr. bulstrod condemn mr. vinci beyondanyth for her flighti, and spoil her children so.”“what’s bulstrod to me? i don’t bank with him.”“well, mr. bulstrod is mr. vinci’s own sister, and thei do sai thatmr. vinci mostli trade on the bank monei; and you mai see yourself,brother, when a woman past forti ha pink string alwai fly, andthat light wai of laugh at everyth, it’s veri unbecom. butindulg your children is on thing, and find monei to pai theirdebt is anoth. and it’s openli said that young vinci ha raisedmonei on hi expect. i don’t sai what expect. miss garthhear me, and is welcom to tell again. i know young peopl hangtogeth.”“no, thank you, mr. waul,” said mari garth. “i dislik hearingscand too much to wish to repeat it.”mr. featherston rub the knob of hi stick and made a briefconvuls show of laughter, which had much the same genuin as anold whist-player’s chuckl over a bad hand. still look at the fire,he said—“and who pretend to sai fred vinci hasn’t got expect? such afin, spirit fellow is like enough to have ’em.”there wa a slight paus befor mr. waul repli, and when she didso, her voic seem to be slightli moisten with tear, though herfac wa still dry.“whether or no, brother, it is natur pain to me and my brothersolomon to hear your name made free with, and your complaint be sucha mai carri you off sudden, and peopl who ar no more featherstonesthan the merri-andrew at the fair, openli reckon on your propertycom to _them_. and me your own sister, and solomon your own brother!and if that’s to be it, what ha it pleas the almighti to makefamili for?” here mr. waul’s tear fell, but with moder.“come, out with it, jane!” said mr. featherston, look at her. “youmean to sai, fred vinci ha been get somebodi to advanc him moneyon what he sai he know about my will, eh?”“i never said so, brother” (mr. waul’s voic had again becom dry andunshaken). “it wa told me by my brother solomon last night when hecal come from market to give me advic about the old wheat, mebe a widow, and my son john onli three-and-twenti, though steadybeyond anyth. and he had it from most undeni author, and noton, but mani.”“stuff and nonsens! i don’t believ a word of it. it’s all a got-upstori. go to the window, missi; i thought i heard a hors. see if thedoctor’s come.”“not got up by me, brother, nor yet by solomon, who, whatev els hemai be—and i don’t deni he ha odditi—ha made hi will and partedhi properti equal between such kin as he’s friend with; though, formi part, i think there ar time when some should be consid morethan other. but solomon make it no secret what he mean to do.”“the more fool he!” said mr. featherston, with some difficulti;break into a sever fit of cough that requir mari garth tostand near him, so that she did not find out whose hors thei werewhich present paus stamp on the gravel befor the door.befor mr. featherston’s cough wa quiet, rosamond enter, bear upher ride-habit with much grace. she bow ceremoni to mr.waul, who said stiffli, “how do you do, miss?” smile and noddedsil to mari, and remain stand till the cough should ceas,and allow her uncl to notic her.“heydai, miss!” he said at last, “you have a fine color. where’s fred?”“see about the hors. he will be in present.”“sit down, sit down. mr. waul, you’d better go.”even those neighbor who had call peter featherston an old fox, hadnev accus him of be insincer polit, and hi sister wa quiteus to the peculiar absenc of ceremoni with which he mark hi senseof blood-relationship. inde, she herself wa accustom to think thatentir freedom from the necess of behav agreeabl wa includ inth almighti’s intent about famili. she rose slowli without anysign of resent, and said in her usual muffl monoton, “brother, ihop the new doctor will be abl to do someth for you. solomon saysther’s great talk of hi clever. i’m sure it’s my wish you shouldb spare. and there’s none more readi to nurs you than your ownsist and your own niec, if you’d onli sai the word. there’srebecca, and joanna, and elizabeth, you know.”“ay, ay, i rememb—you’ll see i’ve rememb ’em all—all dark andugli. thei’d need have some monei, eh? there never wa ani beauti inth women of our famili; but the featherston have alwai had somemonei, and the waul too. waul had monei too. a warm man wa waul.ay, ay; monei’s a good egg; and if you’ve got monei to leav behindy, lai it in a warm nest. good-by, mr. waul.” here mr. featherstonepul at both side of hi wig as if he want to deafen himself, andhi sister went awai rumin on thi oracular speech of hi.notwithstand her jealousi of the vinci and of mari garth, thereremain as the nethermost sediment in her mental shallow a persuasionthat her brother peter featherston could never leav hi chiefproperti awai from hi blood-relat:—els, why had the almightycarri off hi two wive both childless, after he had gain so muchbi manganes and thing, turn up when nobodi expect it?—and whywa there a lowick parish church, and the waul and powderel allsit in the same pew for gener, and the featherston pew nextto them, if, the sundai after her brother peter’s death, everybodi wasto know that the properti wa gone out of the famili? the human mindha at no period accept a moral chao; and so preposter a resultwa not strictli conceiv. but we ar frighten at much that is notstrictli conceiv.when fred came in the old man ei him with a peculiar twinkl, whichth younger had often had reason to interpret as pride in thesatisfactori detail of hi appear.“you two miss go awai,” said mr. featherston. “i want to speak tofr.”“come into my room, rosamond, you will not mind the cold for a littlewhil,” said mari. the two girl had not onli known each other inchildhood, but had been at the same provinci school togeth (mari asan articl pupil), so that thei had mani memori in common, and likedveri well to talk in privat. inde, thi _tête-à-tête_ wa on ofrosamond’s object in come to stone court.old featherston would not begin the dialogu till the door had beenclos. he continu to look at fred with the same twinkl and with oneof hi habitu grimac, altern screw and widen hi mouth;and when he spoke, it wa in a low tone, which might be taken for thatof an inform readi to be bought off, rather than for the tone of anoffend senior. he wa not a man to feel ani strong moral indignationeven on account of trespass against himself. it wa natur thatoth should want to get an advantag over him, but then, he wa alittl too cun for them.“so, sir, you’ve been pai ten per cent for monei which you’vepromis to pai off by mortgag my land when i’m dead and gone, eh?you put my life at a twelvemonth, sai. but i can alter my will yet.”fred blush. he had not borrow monei in that wai, for excellentreason. but he wa consciou of have spoken with some confid(perhap with more than he exactli rememb) about hi prospect ofget featherston’s land as a futur mean of pai present debt.“i don’t know what you refer to, sir. i have certainli never borrowedani monei on such an insecur. pleas do explain.”“no, sir, it’s you must explain. i can alter my will yet, let me tellyou. i’m of sound mind—can reckon compound interest in my head, andrememb everi fool’s name as well as i could twenti year ago. whatth deuc? i’m under eighti. i sai, you must contradict thi stori.”“i have contradict it, sir,” fred answer, with a touch ofimpati, not rememb that hi uncl did not verballydiscrimin contradict from disprov, though no on wa furtherfrom confound the two idea than old featherston, who oftenwond that so mani fool took hi own assert for proof. “but icontradict it again. the stori is a silli lie.”“nonsens! you must bring dockiment. it come from author.”“name the author, and make him name the man of whom i borrow themonei, and then i can disprov the stori.”“it’s pretti good author, i think—a man who know most of what goeson in middlemarch. it’s that fine, religi, charit uncl o’your. come now!” here mr. featherston had hi peculiar inward shakewhich signifi merriment.“mr. bulstrod?”“who els, eh?”“then the stori ha grown into thi lie out of some sermon wordsh mai have let fall about me. do thei pretend that he name the manwho lent me the monei?”“if there is such a man, depend upon it bulstrod know him. but,suppos you onli tri to get the monei lent, and didn’t getit—bulstrod ’ud know that too. you bring me a write from bulstrodeto sai he doesn’t believ you’ve ever promis to pai your debt out o’my land. come now!”mr. featherston’s face requir it whole scale of grimac as amuscular outlet to hi silent triumph in the sound of hisfaculti.fred felt himself to be in a disgust dilemma.“you must be joke, sir. mr. bulstrod, like other men, believesscor of thing that ar not true, and he ha a prejudic against me.i could easili get him to write that he knew no fact in proof of thereport you speak of, though it might lead to unpleas. but icould hardli ask him to write down what he believ or doe not believeabout me.” fred paus an instant, and then ad, in polit appeal tohi uncl’s vaniti, “that is hardli a thing for a gentleman to ask.”but he wa disappoint in the result.“ay, i know what you mean. you’d sooner offend me than bulstrod. andwhat’s he?—he’s got no land hereabout that ever i heard tell of. aspeckil fellow! he mai come down ani dai, when the devil leavesoff back him. and that’s what hi religion mean: he want goda’mighti to come in. that’s nonsens! there’s on thing i made outpretti clear when i us to go to church—and it’s thi: god a’mightystick to the land. he promis land, and he give land, and he makeschap rich with corn and cattl. but you take the other side. you likebulstrod and speckil better than featherston and land.”“i beg your pardon, sir,” said fred, rise, stand with hi back toth fire and beat hi boot with hi whip. “i like neither bulstrodenor specul.” he spoke rather sulkili, feel himself stalem.“well, well, you can do without me, that’s pretti clear,” said oldfeatherston, secretli dislik the possibl that fred would showhimself at all independ. “you neither want a bit of land to make asquir of you instead of a starv parson, nor a lift of a hundredpound by the wai. it’s all on to me. i can make five codicil if ilik, and i shall keep my bank-note for a nest-egg. it’s all on tome.”fred color again. featherston had rare given him present ofmonei, and at thi moment it seem almost harder to part with theimmedi prospect of bank-note than with the more distant prospect ofth land.“i am not ungrat, sir. i never meant to show disregard for ani kindintent you might have toward me. on the contrari.”“veri good. then prove it. you bring me a letter from bulstrod sayingh doesn’t believ you’ve been crack and promis to pai your debtsout o’ my land, and then, if there’s ani scrape you’ve got into, we’llsee if i can’t back you a bit. come now! that’s a bargain. here, givem your arm. i’ll try and walk round the room.”fred, in spite of hi irrit, had kind enough in him to be alittl sorri for the unlov, unvener old man, who with hisdrops leg look more than usual pitiabl in walk. whilegiv hi arm, he thought that he should not himself like to be an oldfellow with hi constitut break up; and he waitedgood-temperedli, first befor the window to hear the wont remarksabout the guinea-fowl and the weather-cock, and then befor the scantybook-shelv, of which the chief glori in dark calf were josephu,culpepp, klopstock’s “messiah,” and sever volum of the“gentleman’s magazin.”“read me the name o’ the book. come now! you’re a colleg man.”fred gave him the titl.“what did missi want with more book? what must you be bring hermor book for?”“thei amus her, sir. she is veri fond of read.”“a littl too fond,” said mr. featherston, captious. “she wa forread when she sat with me. but i put a stop to that. she’s got thenewspap to read out loud. that’s enough for on dai, i should think.i can’t abid to see her read to herself. you mind and not bring herani more book, do you hear?”“ye, sir, i hear.” fred had receiv thi order befor, and hadsecretli disobei it. he intend to disobei it again.“ring the bell,” said mr. featherston; “i want missi to come down.”rosamond and mari had been talk faster than their male friend. theydid not think of sit down, but stood at the toilet-tabl near thewindow while rosamond took off her hat, adjust her veil, and appliedlittl touch of her finger-tip to her hair—hair of infantinefair, neither flaxen nor yellow. mari garth seem all the plainerstand at an angl between the two nymph—the on in the glass, andth on out of it, who look at each other with ey of heavenli blue,deep enough to hold the most exquisit mean an ingeni beholdercould put into them, and deep enough to hide the mean of the ownerif these should happen to be less exquisit. onli a few children inmiddlemarch look blond by the side of rosamond, and the slim figuredisplai by her ride-habit had delic undul. in fact, mostmen in middlemarch, except her brother, held that miss vinci wa thebest girl in the world, and some call her an angel. mari garth, onth contrari, had the aspect of an ordinari sinner: she wa brown; hercurli dark hair wa rough and stubborn; her statur wa low; and itwould not be true to declar, in satisfactori antithesi, that she hadal the virtu. plain ha it peculiar temptat and vice quitea much as beauti; it is apt either to feign amiabl, or, notfeign it, to show all the repuls of discont: at ani rate,to be call an ugli thing in contrast with that love creatur yourcompanion, is apt to produc some effect beyond a sens of fineverac and fit in the phrase. at the ag of two-and-twenti maryhad certainli not attain that perfect good sens and good principlewhich ar usual recommend to the less fortun girl, as if theywer to be obtain in quantiti readi mix, with a flavor ofresign as requir. her shrewd had a streak of satiricbitt continu renew and never carri utterli out of sight,except by a strong current of gratitud toward those who, instead oftel her that she ought to be content, did someth to make herso. advanc womanhood had temper her plain, which wa of a goodhuman sort, such as the mother of our race have veri commonli worn inal latitud under a more or less becom headgear. rembrandt wouldhav paint her with pleasur, and would have made her broad featureslook out of the canva with intellig honesti. for honesti,truth-tell fair, wa mari’s reign virtu: she neither triedto creat illus, nor indulg in them for her own behoof, and whensh wa in a good mood she had humor enough in her to laugh at herself.when she and rosamond happen both to be reflect in the glass, shesaid, laughingli—“what a brown patch i am by the side of you, rosi! you ar the mostunbecom companion.”“oh no! no on think of your appear, you ar so sensibl andus, mari. beauti is of veri littl consequ in realiti,” saidrosamond, turn her head toward mari, but with ey swerv towardsth new view of her neck in the glass.“you mean _my_ beauti,” said mari, rather sardon.rosamond thought, “poor mari, she take the kindest thing ill.” aloudsh said, “what have you been do late?”“i? oh, mind the hous—pour out syrup—pretend to be amiableand content—learn to have a bad opinion of everybodi.”“it is a wretch life for you.”“no,” said mari, curtli, with a littl toss of her head. “i think mylif is pleasant than your miss morgan’s.”“ye; but miss morgan is so uninterest, and not young.”“she is interest to herself, i suppos; and i am not at all surethat everyth get easier as on get older.”“no,” said rosamond, reflect; “on wonder what such peopl do,without ani prospect. to be sure, there is religion as a support. but,”she ad, dimpl, “it is veri differ with you, mari. you mai havean offer.”“ha ani on told you he mean to make me on?”“of cours not. i mean, there is a gentleman who mai fall in love withyou, see you almost everi dai.”a certain chang in mari’s face wa chiefli determin by the resolvenot to show ani chang.“doe that alwai make peopl fall in love?” she answer, carelessli;“it seem to me quit as often a reason for detest each other.”“not when thei ar interest and agreeabl. i hear that mr. lydgatei both.”“oh, mr. lydgat!” said mari, with an unmistak laps intoindiffer. “you want to know someth about him,” she ad, notchoos to indulg rosamond’s indirect.“mere, how you like him.”“there is no question of like at present. my like alwai want somelittl kind to kindl it. i am not magnanim enough to likepeopl who speak to me without seem to see me.”“is he so haughti?” said rosamond, with heighten satisfact. “youknow that he is of good famili?”“no; he did not give that as a reason.”“mari! you ar the oddest girl. but what sort of look man is he?describ him to me.”“how can on describ a man? i can give you an inventori: heavyeyebrow, dark ey, a straight nose, thick dark hair, larg solidwhit hand—and—let me see—oh, an exquisit cambricpocket-handkerchief. but you will see him. you know thi is about thetim of hi visit.”rosamond blush a littl, but said, medit, “i rather like ahaughti manner. i cannot endur a rattl young man.”“i did not tell you that mr. lydgat wa haughti; but _il y en a pourtou le goût_, as littl mamsel us to sai, and if ani girl canchoos the particular sort of conceit she would like, i should think iti you, rosi.”“haughti is not conceit; i call fred conceit.”“i wish no on said ani wors of him. he should be more care. mr.waul ha been tell uncl that fred is veri unsteadi.” mari spokefrom a girlish impuls which got the better of her judgment. there wasa vagu uneasi associ with the word “unsteadi” which she hopedrosamond might sai someth to dissip. but she purpos abstainedfrom mention mr. waul’s more special insinu.“oh, fred is horrid!” said rosamond. she would not have allow herselfso unsuit a word to ani on but mari.“what do you mean by horrid?”“he is so idl, and make papa so angri, and sai he will not takeord.”“i think fred is quit right.”“how can you sai he is quit right, mari? i thought you had more senseof religion.”“he is not fit to be a clergyman.”“but he ought to be fit.”—“well, then, he is not what he ought to be. iknow some other peopl who ar in the same case.”“but no on approv of them. i should not like to marri a clergyman;but there must be clergymen.”“it doe not follow that fred must be on.”“but when papa ha been at the expens of educ him for it! andonli suppos, if he should have no fortun left him?”“i can suppos that veri well,” said mari, dryli.“then i wonder you can defend fred,” said rosamond, inclin to pushthi point.“i don’t defend him,” said mari, laugh; “i would defend ani parishfrom have him for a clergyman.”“but of cours if he were a clergyman, he must be differ.”“ye, he would be a great hypocrit; and he is not that yet.”“it is of no us sai anyth to you, mari. you alwai take fred’spart.”“why should i not take hi part?” said mari, light up. “he wouldtak mine. he is the onli person who take the least troubl to obligem.”“you make me feel veri uncomfort, mari,” said rosamond, with hergravest mild; “i would not tell mamma for the world.”“what would you not tell her?” said mari, angrili.“prai do not go into a rage, mari,” said rosamond, mildli as ever.“if your mamma is afraid that fred will make me an offer, tell her thati would not marri him if he ask me. but he is not go to do so,that i am awar. he certainli never ha ask me.”“mari, you ar alwai so violent.”“and you ar alwai so exasper.”“i? what can you blame me for?”“oh, blameless peopl ar alwai the most exasper. there is thebel—i think we must go down.”“i did not mean to quarrel,” said rosamond, put on her hat.“quarrel? nonsens; we have not quarrel. if on is not to get into arag sometim, what is the good of be friend?”“am i to repeat what you have said?”“just as you pleas. i never sai what i am afraid of have repeat.but let us go down.”mr. lydgat wa rather late thi morn, but the visitor stai longenough to see him; for mr. featherston ask rosamond to sing to him,and she herself wa so kind as to propos a second favorit song ofhi—“flow on, thou shine river”—after she had sung “home, sweet home”(which she detest). thi hard-head old overreach approv of thesentiment song, as the suitabl garnish for girl, and also asfundament fine, sentiment be the right thing for a song.mr. featherston wa still applaud the last perform, andassur missi that her voic wa as clear as a blackbird’s, when mr.lydgat’s hors pass the window.hi dull expect of the usual disagre routin with an agedpati—who can hardli believ that medicin would not “set him up” ifth doctor were onli clever enough—ad to hi gener disbelief inmiddlemarch charm, made a doubli effect background to thi visionof rosamond, whom old featherston made hast ostentati tointroduc as hi niec, though he had never thought it worth while tospeak of mari garth in that light. noth escap lydgat inrosamond’s grace behavior: how delic she waiv the noticewhich the old man’s want of tast had thrust upon her by a quietgrav, not show her dimpl on the wrong occas, but showingthem afterward in speak to mari, to whom she address herself withso much good-natur interest, that lydgat, after quickli examiningmari more fulli than he had done befor, saw an ador kind inrosamond’s ey. but mari from some caus look rather out of temper.“miss rosi ha been sing me a song—you’ve noth to sai againstthat, eh, doctor?” said mr. featherston. “i like it better than yourphys.”“that ha made me forget how the time wa go,” said rosamond, risingto reach her hat, which she had laid asid befor sing, so that herflow-like head on it white stem wa seen in perfect abov herrid-habit. “fred, we must realli go.”“veri good,” said fred, who had hi own reason for not be in thebest spirit, and want to get awai.“miss vinci is a musician?” said lydgat, follow her with hi ey.(everi nerv and muscl in rosamond wa adjust to the consciousnessthat she wa be look at. she wa by natur an actress of partsthat enter into her _physiqu:_ she even act her own charact, andso well, that she did not know it to be precis her own.)“the best in middlemarch, i’ll be bound,” said mr. featherston, “letth next be who she will. eh, fred? speak up for your sister.”“i’m afraid i’m out of court, sir. my evid would be good fornoth.”“middlemarch ha not a veri high standard, uncl,” said rosamond, witha pretti light, go toward her whip, which lai at a distanc.lydgat wa quick in anticip her. he reach the whip befor shedid, and turn to present it to her. she bow and look at him: heof cours wa look at her, and their ey met with that peculiarmeet which is never arriv at by effort, but seem like a suddendivin clearanc of haze. i think lydgat turn a littl paler thanusu, but rosamond blush deepli and felt a certain astonish.after that, she wa realli anxiou to go, and did not know what sort ofstupid her uncl wa talk of when she went to shake hand withhim.yet thi result, which she took to be a mutual impress, calledfal in love, wa just what rosamond had contempl beforehand.ever sinc that import new arriv in middlemarch she had woven alittl futur, of which someth like thi scene wa the necessarybegin. stranger, whether wreck and cling to a raft, or dulyescort and accompani by portmanteau, have alwai had acircumstanti fascin for the virgin mind, against which nativemerit ha urg itself in vain. and a stranger wa absolut necessaryto rosamond’s social romanc, which had alwai turn on a lover andbridegroom who wa not a middlemarch, and who had no connect atal like her own: of late, inde, the construct seem to demandthat he should somehow be relat to a baronet. now that she and thestrang had met, realiti prove much more move than anticip,and rosamond could not doubt that thi wa the great epoch of her life.she judg of her own symptom as those of awaken love, and she heldit still more natur that mr. lydgat should have fallen in love atfirst sight of her. these thing happen so often at ball, and whynot by the morn light, when the complexion show all the better forit? rosamond, though no older than mari, wa rather us to beingfallen in love with; but she, for her part, had remain indifferentand fastidi critic toward both fresh sprig and fade bachelor.and here wa mr. lydgat suddenli correspond to her ideal, beingaltogeth foreign to middlemarch, carri a certain air ofdistinct congruou with good famili, and possess connectionswhich offer vista of that middl-class heaven, rank; a man oftal, also, whom it would be especi delight to enslav: infact, a man who had touch her natur quit newli, and brought a vividinterest into her life which wa better than ani fanci “might-be”such as she wa in the habit of oppos to the actual.thu, in ride home, both the brother and the sister were preoccupiedand inclin to be silent. rosamond, whose basi for her structur hadth usual airi slight, wa of remark detail and realisticimagin when the foundat had been onc presuppos; and beforethei had ridden a mile she wa far on in the costum and introductionsof her wed life, have determin on her hous in middlemarch, andforeseen the visit she would pai to her husband’s high-bred relativesat a distanc, whose finish manner she could appropri asthoroughli as she had done her school accomplish, preparingherself thu for vaguer elev which might ultim come. therewa noth financi, still less sordid, in her previs: she caredabout what were consid refin, and not about the monei thatwa to pai for them.fred’s mind, on the other hand, wa busi with an anxieti which even hisreadi hope could not immedi quell. he saw no wai of eludingfeatherston’s stupid demand without incur consequ which helik less even than the task of fulfil it. hi father wa alreadyout of humor with him, and would be still more so if he were theoccas of ani addit cool between hi own famili and thebulstrod. then, he himself hate have to go and speak to hi unclebulstrod, and perhap after drink wine he had said mani foolishth about featherston’s properti, and these had been magnifi byreport. fred felt that he made a wretch figur as a fellow whobrag about expect from a queer old miser like featherston,and went to beg for certif at hi bid. but—thoseexpect! he realli had them, and he saw no agreeabl alternativeif he gave them up; besid, he had late made a debt which gall himextrem, and old featherston had almost bargain to pai it off. thewhol affair wa miser small: hi debt were small, even hisexpect were not anyth so veri magnific. fred had known mento whom he would have been asham of confess the small of hisscrap. such rumin natur produc a streak of misanthropicbitt. to be born the son of a middlemarch manufactur, andinevit heir to noth in particular, while such men as mainwaringand vyan—certainli life wa a poor busi, when a spirit youngfellow, with a good appetit for the best of everyth, had so poor anoutlook.it had not occur to fred that the introduct of bulstrod’s namein the matter wa a fiction of old featherston’s; nor could thi havemad ani differ to hi posit. he saw plainli enough that the oldman want to exercis hi power by torment him a littl, and alsoprob to get some satisfact out of see him on unpleas termswith bulstrod. fred fanci that he saw to the bottom of hi unclefeatherston’s soul, though in realiti half what he saw there wa nomor than the reflex of hi own inclin. the difficult task ofknow anoth soul is not for young gentlemen whose conscious ischiefli made up of their own wish.fred’s main point of debat with himself wa, whether he should tellhi father, or try to get through the affair without hi father’sknowledg. it wa probabl mr. waul who had been talk about him;and if mari garth had repeat mr. waul’s report to rosamond, itwould be sure to reach hi father, who would as sure question himabout it. he said to rosamond, as thei slacken their pace—“rosi, did mari tell you that mr. waul had said anyth about me?”“ye, inde, she did.”“what?”“that you were veri unsteadi.”“wa that all?”“i should think that wa enough, fred.”“you ar sure she said no more?”“mari mention noth els. but realli, fred, i think you ought to beasham.”“oh, fudg! don’t lectur me. what did mari sai about it?”“i am not oblig to tell you. you care so veri much what mari sai,and you ar too rude to allow me to speak.”“of cours i care what mari sai. she is the best girl i know.”“i should never have thought she wa a girl to fall in love with.”“how do you know what men would fall in love with? girl never know.”“at least, fred, let me advis _you_ not to fall in love with her, forsh sai she would not marri you if you ask her.”“she might have wait till i did ask her.”“i knew it would nettl you, fred.”“not at all. she would not have said so if you had not provok her.”befor reach home, fred conclud that he would tell the wholeaffair as simpli as possibl to hi father, who might perhap take onhimself the unpleas busi of speak to bulstrod.book ii.old and young.chapter xiii.1_st gent_. how class your man?—as better than the most, or, seem better, wors beneath that cloak? as saint or knave, pilgrim or hypocrit?2_d gent_. nai, tell me how you class your wealth of book the drift relic of all time. as well sort them at onc by size and liveri: vellum, tall copi, and the common calf will hardli cover more divers than all your label cunningli devis to class your unread author.in consequ of what he had heard from fred, mr. vinci determin tospeak with mr. bulstrod in hi privat room at the bank at half-paston, when he wa usual free from other caller. but a visitor hadcom in at on o’clock, and mr. bulstrod had so much to sai to him,that there wa littl chanc of the interview be over in half anhour. the banker’s speech wa fluent, but it wa also copiou, and heus up an appreci amount of time in brief medit paus. donot imagin hi sickli aspect to have been of the yellow, black-hairedsort: he had a pale blond skin, thin grai-besprinkl brown hair,light-grai ey, and a larg forehead. loud men call hi subdu tonean underton, and sometim impli that it wa inconsist withopen; though there seem to be no reason why a loud man should notb given to conceal of anyth except hi own voic, unless it canb shown that holi writ ha place the seat of candor in the lung. mr.bulstrod had also a deferenti bend attitud in listen, and anappar fix attent in hi ey which made those person whothought themselv worth hear infer that he wa seek the utmostimprov from their discours. other, who expect to make no greatfigur, dislik thi kind of moral lantern turn on them. if you arenot proud of your cellar, there is no thrill of satisfact in seeingyour guest hold up hi wine-glass to the light and look judici. suchjoi ar reserv for consciou merit. henc mr. bulstrod’s closeattent wa not agreeabl to the publican and sinner inmiddlemarch; it wa attribut by some to hi be a pharise, and byother to hi be evangel. less superfici reason among themwish to know who hi father and grandfath were, observ thatfiv-and-twenti year ago nobodi had ever heard of a bulstrod inmiddlemarch. to hi present visitor, lydgat, the scrutin look wasa matter of indiffer: he simpli form an unfavor opinion ofth banker’s constitut, and conclud that he had an eager inwardlif with littl enjoy of tangibl thing.“i shall be exceedingli oblig if you will look in on me hereoccasion, mr. lydgat,” the banker observ, after a brief paus.“if, as i dare to hope, i have the privileg of find you a valuablecoadjutor in the interest matter of hospit manag, there willb mani question which we shall need to discuss in privat. as to thenew hospit, which is nearli finish, i shall consid what you havesaid about the advantag of the special destin for fever. thedecis will rest with me, for though lord medlicot ha given theland and timber for the build, he is not dispos to give hisperson attent to the object.”“there ar few thing better worth the pain in a provinci town likethi,” said lydgat. “a fine fever hospit in addit to the oldinfirmari might be the nucleu of a medic school here, when onc weget our medic reform; and what would do more for medic educationthan the spread of such school over the countri? a born provinci manwho ha a grain of public spirit as well as a few idea, should do whath can to resist the rush of everyth that is a littl better thancommon toward london. ani valid profession aim mai often find afreer, if not a richer field, in the provinc.”on of lydgat’s gift wa a voic habitu deep and sonor, yetcap of becom veri low and gentl at the right moment. about hisordinari bear there wa a certain fling, a fearless expect ofsuccess, a confid in hi own power and integr much fortifi bycontempt for petti obstacl or seduct of which he had had noexperi. but thi proud open wa made lovabl by an expressionof unaffect good-will. mr. bulstrod perhap like him the better forth differ between them in pitch and manner; he certainli likedhim the better, as rosamond did, for be a stranger in middlemarch.on can begin so mani thing with a new person!—even begin to be abett man.“i shall rejoic to furnish your zeal with fuller opportun,” mr.bulstrod answer; “i mean, by confid to you the superintend ofmi new hospit, should a matur knowledg favor that issu, for i amdetermin that so great an object shall not be shackl by our twophysician. inde, i am encourag to consid your advent to thistown as a graciou indic that a more manifest bless is now tobe award to my effort, which have hitherto been much withstood. withregard to the old infirmari, we have gain the initi point—i meanyour elect. and now i hope you will not shrink from incur acertain amount of jealousi and dislik from your profession brethrenbi present yourself as a reform.”“i will not profess braveri,” said lydgat, smile, “but i acknowledgea good deal of pleasur in fight, and i should not care for myprofess, if i did not believ that better method were to be foundand enforc there as well as everywher els.”“the standard of that profess is low in middlemarch, my dear sir,”said the banker. “i mean in knowledg and skill; not in social statu,for our medic men ar most of them connect with respectabletownspeopl here. my own imperfect health ha induc me to give someattent to those palli resourc which the divin merci hasplac within our reach. i have consult emin men in themetropoli, and i am painfulli awar of the backward under whichmed treatment labor in our provinci district.”“ye;—with our present medic rule and educ, on must besatisfi now and then to meet with a fair practition. as to all thehigh question which determin the start-point of a diagnosi—asto the philosophi of medic evid—ani glimmer of these can onlycom from a scientif cultur of which countri practition haveusu no more notion than the man in the moon.”mr. bulstrod, bend and look intent, found the form whichlydg had given to hi agreement not quit suit to hiscomprehens. under such circumst a judici man chang thetop and enter on ground where hi own gift mai be more us.“i am awar,” he said, “that the peculiar bia of medic abil istoward materi mean. nevertheless, mr. lydgat, i hope we shall notvari in sentiment as to a measur in which you ar not like to beactiv concern, but in which your sympathet concurr mai be anaid to me. you recogn, i hope; the exist of spiritu interestsin your patient?”“certainli i do. but those word ar apt to cover differ mean todiffer mind.”“precis. and on such subject wrong teach is as fatal as noteach. now a point which i have much at heart to secur is a newregul as to cleric attend at the old infirmari. the buildingstand in mr. farebroth’s parish. you know mr. farebroth?”“i have seen him. he gave me hi vote. i must call to thank him. heseem a veri bright pleasant littl fellow. and i understand he is anaturalist.”“mr. farebroth, my dear sir, is a man deepli pain to contempl.i suppos there is not a clergyman in thi countri who ha greatertal.” mr. bulstrod paus and look medit.“i have not yet been pain by find ani excess talent inmiddlemarch,” said lydgat, bluntli.“what i desir,” mr. bulstrod continu, look still more seriou,“is that mr. farebroth’s attend at the hospit should besupersed by the appoint of a chaplain—of mr. tyke, in fact—andthat no other spiritu aid should be call in.”“as a medic man i could have no opinion on such a point unless i knewmr. tyke, and even then i should requir to know the case in which hewa appli.” lydgat smile, but he wa bent on be circumspect.“of cours you cannot enter fulli into the merit of thi measur atpres. but”—here mr. bulstrod began to speak with a more chiselledemphasi—“the subject is like to be refer to the medic board ofth infirmari, and what i trust i mai ask of you is, that in virtu ofth cooper between us which i now look forward to, you will not,so far as you ar concern, be influenc by my oppon in thismatt.”“i hope i shall have noth to do with cleric disput,” saidlydg. “the path i have chosen is to work well in my own profess.”“my respons, mr. lydgat, is of a broader kind. with me, inde,thi question is on of sacr account; wherea with myoppon, i have good reason to sai that it is an occas forgratifi a spirit of worldli opposit. but i shall not thereforedrop on iota of my convict, or ceas to identifi myself with thattruth which an evil gener hate. i have devot myself to thisobject of hospit-improv, but i will boldli confess to you, mr.lydgat, that i should have no interest in hospit if i believ thatnoth more wa concern therein than the cure of mortal diseas. ihav anoth ground of action, and in the face of persecut i willnot conceal it.”mr. bulstrod’s voic had becom a loud and agit whisper as he saidth last word.“there we certainli differ,” said lydgat. but he wa not sorri thatth door wa now open, and mr. vinci wa announc. that floridsoci personag wa becom more interest to him sinc he had seenrosamond. not that, like her, he had been weav ani futur in whichtheir lot were unit; but a man natur rememb a charm girlwith pleasur, and is will to dine where he mai see her again.befor he took leav, mr. vinci had given that invit which he hadbeen “in no hurri about,” for rosamond at breakfast had mention thatsh thought her uncl featherston had taken the new doctor into greatfavor.mr. bulstrod, alon with hi brother-in-law, pour himself out aglass of water, and open a sandwich-box.“i cannot persuad you to adopt my regimen, vinci?”“no, no; i’ve no opinion of that system. life want pad,” said mr.vinci, unabl to omit hi portabl theori. “howev,” he went on,accent the word, as if to dismiss all irrelev, “what i came hereto talk about wa a littl affair of my young scapegrac, fred’s.”“that is a subject on which you and i ar like to take quit asdiffer view as on diet, vinci.”“i hope not thi time.” (mr. vinci wa resolv to be good-humor.)“the fact is, it’s about a whim of old featherston’s. somebodi hasbeen cook up a stori out of spite, and tell it to the old man, totri to set him against fred. he’s veri fond of fred, and is like todo someth handsom for him; inde he ha as good as told fred thath mean to leav him hi land, and that make other peopl jealou.”“vinci, i must repeat, that you will not get ani concurr from me asto the cours you have pursu with your eldest son. it wa entirelyfrom worldli vaniti that you destin him for the church: with a familyof three son and four daughter, you were not warrant in devotingmonei to an expens educ which ha succeed in noth but ingiv him extravag idl habit. you ar now reap theconsequ.”to point out other peopl’s error wa a duti that mr. bulstrod rarelyshrank from, but mr. vinci wa not equal prepar to be patient. whena man ha the immedi prospect of be mayor, and is readi, in theinterest of commerc, to take up a firm attitud on politicsgener, he ha natur a sens of hi import to the frameworkof thing which seem to throw question of privat conduct into thebackground. and thi particular reproof irrit him more than anyoth. it wa emin superflu to him to be told that he wasreap the consequ. but he felt hi neck under bulstrod’s yoke;and though he usual enjoi kick, he wa anxiou to refrain fromthat relief.“as to that, bulstrod, it’s no us go back. i’m not on of yourpattern men, and i don’t pretend to be. i couldn’t forese everythingin the trade; there wasn’t a finer busi in middlemarch than our,and the lad wa clever. my poor brother wa in the church, and wouldhav done well—had got prefer alreadi, but that stomach fever tookhim off: els he might have been a dean by thi time. i think i wasjustifi in what i tri to do for fred. if you come to religion, itseem to me a man shouldn’t want to carv out hi meat to an ouncebeforehand:—on must trust a littl to provid and be gener. it’sa good british feel to try and rais your famili a littl: in myopinion, it’s a father’s duti to give hi son a fine chanc.”“i don’t wish to act otherwis than as your best friend, vinci, when isai that what you have been utter just now is on mass ofworldli and inconsist folli.”“veri well,” said mr. vinci, kick in spite of resolut, “i neverprofess to be anyth but worldli; and, what’s more, i don’t seeanybodi els who is not worldli. i suppos you don’t conduct businesson what you call unworldli principl. the onli differ i see isthat on worldli is a littl bit honest than anoth.”“thi kind of discuss is unfruit, vinci,” said mr. bulstrod,who, finish hi sandwich, had thrown himself back in hi chair, andshad hi ey as if weari. “you had some more particular busi.”“ye, ye. the long and short of it is, somebodi ha told oldfeatherston, give you as the author, that fred ha been borrowingor try to borrow monei on the prospect of hi land. of cours younev said ani such nonsens. but the old fellow will insist on it thatfr should bring him a denial in your handwrit; that is, just a bitof a note sai you don’t believ a word of such stuff, either of hishav borrow or tri to borrow in such a fool’s wai. i suppos youcan have no object to do that.”“pardon me. i have an object. i am by no mean sure that your son,in hi reckless and ignor—i will us no sever word—ha nottri to rais monei by hold out hi futur prospect, or even thatsom on mai not have been foolish enough to suppli him on so vagu apresumpt: there is plenti of such lax monei-lend as of otherfolli in the world.”“but fred give me hi honor that he ha never borrow monei on thepret of ani understand about hi uncl’s land. he is not a liar.i don’t want to make him better than he is. i have blown him upwel—nobodi can sai i wink at what he doe. but he is not a liar. and ishould have thought—but i mai be wrong—that there wa no religion tohind a man from believ the best of a young fellow, when you don’tknow wors. it seem to me it would be a poor sort of religion to put aspok in hi wheel by refus to sai you don’t believ such harm ofhim as you’ve got no good reason to believ.”“i am not at all sure that i should be befriend your son bysmooth hi wai to the futur possess of featherston’s properti.i cannot regard wealth as a bless to those who us it simpli as aharvest for thi world. you do not like to hear these thing, vinci,but on thi occas i feel call upon to tell you that i have nomot for further such a disposit of properti as that which youref to. i do not shrink from sai that it will not tend to yourson’s etern welfar or to the glori of god. why then should youexpect me to pen thi kind of affidavit, which ha no object but tokeep up a foolish partial and secur a foolish bequest?”“if you mean to hinder everybodi from have monei but saint andevangelist, you must give up some profit partnership, that’s alli can sai,” mr. vinci burst out veri bluntli. “it mai be for the gloryof god, but it is not for the glori of the middlemarch trade, thatplymdal’s hous us those blue and green dye it get from thebrass manufactori; thei rot the silk, that’s all i know about it.perhap if other peopl knew so much of the profit went to the glori ofgod, thei might like it better. but i don’t mind so much about that—icould get up a pretti row, if i chose.”mr. bulstrod paus a littl befor he answer. “you pain me verymuch by speak in thi wai, vinci. i do not expect you to understandmi ground of action—it is not an easi thing even to thread a path forprincipl in the intricaci of the world—still less to make thethread clear for the careless and the scof. you must rememb, ifyou pleas, that i stretch my toler toward you as my wife’sbrother, and that it littl becom you to complain of me aswithhold materi help toward the worldli posit of your famili.i must remind you that it is not your own prudenc or judgment that hasen you to keep your place in the trade.”“veri like not; but you have been no loser by my trade yet,” said mr.vinci, thoroughli nettl (a result which wa seldom much retard byprevi resolut). “and when you marri harriet, i don’t see howyou could expect that our famili should not hang by the same nail. ifyou’ve chang your mind, and want my famili to come down in the world,you’d better sai so. i’ve never chang; i’m a plain churchman now,just as i us to be befor doctrin came up. i take the world as ifind it, in trade and everyth els. i’m content to be no worsethan my neighbor. but if you want us to come down in the world, sayso. i shall know better what to do then.”“you talk unreason. shall you come down in the world for want ofthi letter about your son?”“well, whether or not, i consid it veri unhandsom of you to refuseit. such do mai be line with religion, but outsid thei have anasti, dog-in-the-manger look. you might as well slander fred: it comespretti near to it when you refus to sai you didn’t set a slandergo. it’s thi sort of thing—thi tyrann spirit, want to playbishop and banker everywher—it’s thi sort of thing make a man’s namestink.”“vinci, if you insist on quarrel with me, it will be exceedinglypain to harriet as well as myself,” said mr. bulstrod, with atrifl more eager and pale than usual.“i don’t want to quarrel. it’s for my interest—and perhap for yourstoo—that we should be friend. i bear you no grudg; i think no worseof you than i do of other peopl. a man who half starv himself, andgo the length in famili prayer, and so on, that you do, believ inhi religion whatev it mai be: you could turn over your capit justa fast with curs and swear:—plenti of fellow do. you like to bemast, there’s no deni that; you must be first chop in heaven, elsey won’t like it much. but you’re my sister’s husband, and we ought tostick togeth; and if i know harriet, she’ll consid it your fault ifw quarrel becaus you strain at a gnat in thi wai, and refus to dofr a good turn. and i don’t mean to sai i shall bear it well. iconsid it unhandsom.”mr. vinci rose, began to button hi great-coat, and look steadili athi brother-in-law, mean to impli a demand for a decis answer.thi wa not the first time that mr. bulstrod had begun by admonishingmr. vinci, and had end by see a veri unsatisfactori reflect ofhimself in the coars unflatt mirror which that manufactur’smind present to the subtler light and shadow of hi fellow-men; andperhap hi experi ought to have warn him how the scene wouldend. but a full-fed fountain will be gener with it water even inth rain, when thei ar wors than useless; and a fine fount ofadmonit is apt to be equal irrepress.it wa not in mr. bulstrod’s natur to compli directli in consequenceof uncomfort suggest. befor chang hi cours, he alwaysneed to shape hi motiv and bring them into accord with hishabitu standard. he said, at last—“i will reflect a littl, vinci. i will mention the subject to harriet.i shall probabl send you a letter.”“veri well. as soon as you can, pleas. i hope it will all be settledbefor i see you to-morrow.”chapter xiv.“follow here the strict receiptfor that sauc to dainti meat,name idl, which mani eatbi prefer, and call it sweet:_first watch for morsel, like a houndmix well with buffet, stir them roundwith good thick oil of flatteri, and froth with mean self-laudingli.serv warm: the vessel you must chooseto keep it in ar dead men’s shoe._”mr. bulstrod’s consult of harriet seem to have had the effectdesir by mr. vinci, for earli the next morn a letter came whichfr could carri to mr. featherston as the requir testimoni.the old gentleman wa stai in bed on account of the cold weather,and as mari garth wa not to be seen in the sit-room, fred wentup-stair immedi and present the letter to hi uncl, who,prop up comfort on a bed-rest, wa not less abl than usual toenjoi hi conscious of wisdom in distrust and frustratingmankind. he put on hi spectacl to read the letter, purs up hislip and draw down their corner.“_under the circumst i will not declin to state myconvict_—tchah! what fine word the fellow put! he’s as fine as anauction—_that your son freder ha not obtain ani advanc ofmonei on bequest promis by mr. featherston_—promis? who said ihad ever promis? i promis noth—i shall make codicil as long as ilik—_and that consid the natur of such a proceed, it isunreason to presum that a young man of sens and charact wouldattempt it_—ah, but the gentleman doesn’t sai you ar a young man ofsens and charact, mark you that, sir!—_as to my own concern with anyreport of such a natur, i distinctli affirm that i never made anystat to the effect that your son had borrow monei on anyproperti that might accru to him on mr. featherston’s demis_—blessmi heart! ‘properti’—accru—demis! lawyer standish is noth to him.he couldn’t speak finer if he want to borrow. well,” mr. featherstoneher look over hi spectacl at fred, while he hand back thelett to him with a contemptu gestur, “you don’t suppos i believea thing becaus bulstrod write it out fine, eh?”fred color. “you wish to have the letter, sir. i should think itveri like that mr. bulstrod’s denial is as good as the authoritywhich told you what he deni.”“everi bit. i never said i believ either on or the other. and nowwhat d’ you expect?” said mr. featherston, curtli, keep on hisspectacl, but withdraw hi hand under hi wrap.“i expect noth, sir.” fred with difficulti restrain himself fromvent hi irrit. “i came to bring you the letter. if you like iwil bid you good morn.”“not yet, not yet. ring the bell; i want missi to come.”it wa a servant who came in answer to the bell.“tell missi to come!” said mr. featherston, impati. “whatbusi had she to go awai?” he spoke in the same tone when mari came.“why couldn’t you sit still here till i told you to go? i want mywaistcoat now. i told you alwai to put it on the bed.”mari’s ey look rather red, as if she had been cry. it wa clearthat mr. featherston wa in on of hi most snappish humor thismorn, and though fred had now the prospect of receiv themuch-need present of monei, he would have prefer be free toturn round on the old tyrant and tell him that mari garth wa too goodto be at hi beck. though fred had risen as she enter the room, shehad bare notic him, and look as if her nerv were quiver withth expect that someth would be thrown at her. but she neverhad anyth wors than word to dread. when she went to reach thewaistcoat from a peg, fred went up to her and said, “allow me.”“let it alon! you bring it, missi, and lai it down here,” said mr.featherston. “now you go awai again till i call you,” he ad, whenth waistcoat wa laid down by him. it wa usual with him to season hispleasur in show favor to on person by be especiallydisagre to anoth, and mari wa alwai at hand to furnish thecondi. when hi own rel came she wa treat better. slowlyh took out a bunch of kei from the waistcoat pocket, and slowli hedrew forth a tin box which wa under the bed-cloth.“you expect i am go to give you a littl fortun, eh?” he said,look abov hi spectacl and paus in the act of open the lid.“not at all, sir. you were good enough to speak of make me a presentth other dai, els, of cours, i should not have thought of thematt.” but fred wa of a hope disposit, and a vision hadpres itself of a sum just larg enough to deliv him from acertain anxieti. when fred got into debt, it alwai seem to himhighli probabl that someth or other—he did not necessarili conceivewhat—would come to pass enabl him to pai in due time. and now thatth providenti occurr wa appar close at hand, it would havebeen sheer absurd to think that the suppli would be short of thene: as absurd as a faith that believ in half a miracl for want ofstrength to believ in a whole on.the deep-vein hand finger mani bank-note on after the other,lai them down flat again, while fred lean back in hi chair,scorn to look eager. he held himself to be a gentleman at heart, anddid not like court an old fellow for hi monei. at last, mr.featherston ei him again over hi spectacl and present him witha littl sheaf of note: fred could see distinctli that there were butfiv, as the less signific edg gape toward him. but then, eachmight mean fifti pound. he took them, sai—“i am veri much oblig to you, sir,” and wa go to roll them upwithout seem to think of their valu. but thi did not suit mr.featherston, who wa ei him intent.“come, don’t you think it worth your while to count ’em? you take moneylik a lord; i suppos you lose it like on.”“i thought i wa not to look a gift-hors in the mouth, sir. but ishal be veri happi to count them.”fred wa not so happi, howev, after he had count them. for theyactu present the absurd of be less than hi hope haddecid that thei must be. what can the fit of thing mean, if nottheir fit to a man’s expect? fail thi, absurd andath gape behind him. the collaps for fred wa sever when he foundthat he held no more than five twenti, and hi share in the highereduc of thi countri did not seem to help him. nevertheless hesaid, with rapid chang in hi fair complexion—“it is veri handsom of you, sir.”“i should think it is,” said mr. featherston, lock hi box andreplac it, then take off hi spectacl deliber, and atlength, as if hi inward medit had more deepli convinc him,repeat, “i should think it handsom.”“i assur you, sir, i am veri grate,” said fred, who had had time torecov hi cheer air.“so you ought to be. you want to cut a figur in the world, and ireckon peter featherston is the onli on you’ve got to trust to.” hereth old man’s ey gleam with a curious mingl satisfact in theconsci that thi smart young fellow reli upon him, and thatth smart young fellow wa rather a fool for do so.“ye, inde: i wa not born to veri splendid chanc. few men havebeen more cramp than i have been,” said fred, with some sens ofsurpris at hi own virtu, consid how hardli he wa dealt with.“it realli seem a littl too bad to have to ride a broken-windedhunt, and see men, who, ar not half such good judg as yourself,abl to throw awai ani amount of monei on bui bad bargain.”“well, you can bui yourself a fine hunter now. eighti pound is enoughfor that, i reckon—and you’ll have twenti pound over to get yourselfout of ani littl scrape,” said mr. featherston, chuckl slightli.“you ar veri good, sir,” said fred, with a fine sens of contrastbetween the word and hi feel.“ay, rather a better uncl than your fine uncl bulstrod. you won’tget much out of hi spekil, i think. he’s got a pretti strongstr round your father’s leg, by what i hear, eh?”“my father never tell me anyth about hi affair, sir.”“well, he show some sens there. but other peopl find ’em out withouthi tell. _he’ll_ never have much to leav you: he’ll most-like diewithout a will—he’s the sort of man to do it—let ’em make him mayor ofmiddlemarch as much as thei like. but you won’t get much by hi dyingwithout a will, though you _ar_ the eldest son.”fred thought that mr. featherston had never been so disagreeablebefor. true, he had never befor given him quit so much monei atonc.“shall i destroi thi letter of mr. bulstrod’s, sir?” said fred,rise with the letter as if he would put it in the fire.“ay, ay, i don’t want it. it’s worth no monei to me.”fred carri the letter to the fire, and thrust the poker through itwith much zest. he long to get out of the room, but he wa a littleasham befor hi inner self, as well as befor hi uncl, to run awayimmedi after pocket the monei. present, the farm-bailiff cameup to give hi master a report, and fred, to hi unspeak relief,wa dismiss with the injunct to come again soon.he had long not onli to be set free from hi uncl, but also to findmari garth. she wa now in her usual place by the fire, with sew inher hand and a book open on the littl tabl by her side. her eyelidshad lost some of their red now, and she had her usual air ofself-command.“am i want up-stair?” she said, half rise as fred enter.“no; i am onli dismiss, becaus simmon is gone up.”mari sat down again, and resum her work. she wa certainli treatinghim with more indiffer than usual: she did not know howaffection indign he had felt on her behalf up-stair.“mai i stai here a littl, mari, or shall i bore you?”“prai sit down,” said mari; “you will not be so heavi a bore as mr.john waul, who wa here yesterdai, and he sat down without ask myleav.”“poor fellow! i think he is in love with you.”“i am not awar of it. and to me it is on of the most odiou thing ina girl’s life, that there must alwai be some supposit of fall inlov come between her and ani man who is kind to her, and to whom shei grate. i should have thought that i, at least, might have beensaf from all that. i have no ground for the nonsens vaniti offanc everybodi who come near me is in love with me.”mari did not mean to betrai ani feel, but in spite of herself sheend in a tremul tone of vexat.“confound john waul! i did not mean to make you angri. i didn’t knowyou had ani reason for be grate to me. i forgot what a greatservic you think it if ani on snuff a candl for you.” fred also hadhi pride, and wa not go to show that he knew what had call forththi outburst of mari’s.“oh, i am not angri, except with the wai of the world. i do like to bespoken to as if i had common-sens. i realli often feel as if i couldunderstand a littl more than i ever hear even from young gentlemen whohav been to colleg.” mari had recov, and she spoke with asuppress rippl under-current of laughter pleasant to hear.“i don’t care how merri you ar at my expens thi morn,” said fred,“i thought you look so sad when you came up-stair. it is a shame youshould stai here to be bulli in that wai.”“oh, i have an easi life—by comparison. i have tri be a teacher,and i am not fit for that: my mind is too fond of wander on it ownwai. i think ani hardship is better than pretend to do what on ispaid for, and never realli do it. everyth here i can do as wella ani on els could; perhap better than some—rosi, for exampl.though she is just the sort of beauti creatur that is imprisonedwith ogr in fairi tale.”“_rosi!_” cri fred, in a tone of profound brotherli sceptic.“come, fred!” said mari, emphat; “you have no right to be socrit.”“do you mean anyth particular—just now?”“no, i mean someth gener—alwai.”“oh, that i am idl and extravag. well, i am not fit to be a poorman. i should not have made a bad fellow if i had been rich.”“you would have done your duti in that state of life to which it hasnot pleas god to call you,” said mari, laugh.“well, i couldn’t do my duti as a clergyman, ani more than you could doyour as a gover. you ought to have a littl fellow-feel there,mari.”“i never said you ought to be a clergyman. there ar other sort ofwork. it seem to me veri miser not to resolv on some cours andact accordingli.”“so i could, if—” fred broke off, and stood up, lean against themantel-piec.“if you were sure you should not have a fortun?”“i did not sai that. you want to quarrel with me. it is too bad of youto be guid by what other peopl sai about me.”“how can i want to quarrel with you? i should be quarrel with allmi new book,” said mari, lift the volum on the tabl. “howevernaughti you mai be to other peopl, you ar good to me.”“becaus i like you better than ani on els. but i know you despisem.”“ye, i do—a littl,” said mari, nod, with a smile.“you would admir a stupend fellow, who would have wise opinionsabout everyth.”“ye, i should.” mari wa sew swiftli, and seem provokinglymistress of the situat. when a convers ha taken a wrong turnfor us, we onli get farther and farther into the swamp of awkward.thi wa what fred vinci felt.“i suppos a woman is never in love with ani on she ha alwaysknown—ever sinc she can rememb; as a man often is. it is alwai somenew fellow who strike a girl.”“let me see,” said mari, the corner of her mouth curl archli; “imust go back on my experi. there is juliet—she seem an exampl ofwhat you sai. but then ophelia had probabl known hamlet a long while;and brenda troil—she had known mordaunt merton ever sinc thei werechildren; but then he seem to have been an estim young man; andminna wa still more deepli in love with cleveland, who wa a stranger.waverlei wa new to flora macivor; but then she did not fall in lovewith him. and there ar olivia and sophia primros, and corinn—theymai be said to have fallen in love with new men. altogeth, myexperi is rather mix.”mari look up with some roguish at fred, and that look of her wasveri dear to him, though the ey were noth more than clear windowswher observ sat laughingli. he wa certainli an affectionatefellow, and as he had grown from boi to man, he had grown in love withhi old playmat, notwithstand that share in the higher educ ofth countri which had exalt hi view of rank and incom.“when a man is not love, it is no us for him to sai that he could bea better fellow—could do anyth—i mean, if he were sure of beinglov in return.”“not of the least us in the world for him to sai he _could_ be better.might, could, would—thei ar contempt auxiliari.”“i don’t see how a man is to be good for much unless he ha some onewoman to love him dearli.”“i think the good should come befor he expect that.”“you know better, mari. women don’t love men for their good.”“perhap not. but if thei love them, thei never think them bad.”“it is hardli fair to sai i am bad.”“i said noth at all about you.”“i never shall be good for anyth, mari, if you will not sai that youlov me—if you will not promis to marri me—i mean, when i am abl tomarri.”“if i did love you, i would not marri you: i would certainli notpromis ever to marri you.”“i think that is quit wick, mari. if you love me, you ought topromis to marri me.”“on the contrari, i think it would be wick in me to marri you even ifi did love you.”“you mean, just as i am, without ani mean of maintain a wife. ofcours: i am but three-and-twenti.”“in that last point you will alter. but i am not so sure of ani otheralter. my father sai an idl man ought not to exist, much less,be marri.”“then i am to blow my brain out?”“no; on the whole i should think you would do better to pass yourexamin. i have heard mr. farebroth sai it is disgracefullyeasi.”“that is all veri fine. anyth is easi to him. not that clevernessha anyth to do with it. i am ten time clever than mani men whopass.”“dear me!” said mari, unabl to repress her sarcasm; “that account forth curat like mr. crows. divid your clever by ten, and thequoti—dear me!—is abl to take a degre. but that onli show you areten time more idl than the other.”“well, if i did pass, you would not want me to go into the church?”“that is not the question—what i want you to do. you have a conscienceof your own, i suppos. there! there is mr. lydgat. i must go and tellmi uncl.”“mari,” said fred, seiz her hand as she rose; “if you will not givem some encourag, i shall get wors instead of better.”“i will not give you ani encourag,” said mari, redden. “yourfriend would dislik it, and so would mine. my father would think it adisgrac to me if i accept a man who got into debt, and would notwork!”fred wa stung, and releas her hand. she walk to the door, butther she turn and said: “fred, you have alwai been so good, sogener to me. i am not ungrat. but never speak to me in that wayagain.”“veri well,” said fred, sulkili, take up hi hat and whip. hiscomplexion show patch of pale pink and dead white. like mani apluck idl young gentleman, he wa thoroughli in love, and with aplain girl, who had no monei! but have mr. featherston’s land in thebackground, and a persuas that, let mari sai what she would, shereal did care for him, fred wa not utterli in despair.when he got home, he gave four of the twenti to hi mother, askingh to keep them for him. “i don’t want to spend that monei, mother. iwant it to pai a debt with. so keep it safe awai from my finger.”“bless you, my dear,” said mr. vinci. she dote on her eldest son andher youngest girl (a child of six), whom other thought her twonaughtiest children. the mother’s ey ar not alwai deceiv in theirparti: she at least can best judg who is the tender,filial-heart child. and fred wa certainli veri fond of hi mother.perhap it wa hi fond for anoth person also that made himparticularli anxiou to take some secur against hi own liabil tospend the hundr pound. for the creditor to whom he ow a hundredand sixti held a firmer secur in the shape of a bill sign bymari’s father.chapter xv.“black ey you have left, you sai, blue ey fail to draw you;yet you seem more rapt to-dai, than of old we saw you.“oh, i track the fairest fair through new haunt of pleasur;footprint here and echo there guid me to my treasur:“lo! she turn—immort youth wrought to mortal statur,fresh as starlight’s ag truth— mani-namèd natur!”a great historian, as he insist on call himself, who had thehappi to be dead a hundr and twenti year ago, and so to take hisplac among the colossi whose huge leg our live petti isobserv to walk under, glori in hi copiou remark and digressionsa the least imit part of hi work, and especi in those initialchapt to the success book of hi histori, where he seem tobr hi armchair to the proscenium and chat with us in all the lustyeas of hi fine english. but field live when the dai were longer(for time, like monei, is measur by our need), when summerafternoon were spaciou, and the clock tick slowli in the wintereven. we belat historian must not linger after hi exampl; andif we did so, it is probabl that our chat would be thin and eager, asif deliv from a campstool in a parrot-hous. i at least have somuch to do in unravel certain human lot, and see how thei werewoven and interwoven, that all the light i can command must beconcentr on thi particular web, and not dispers over thattempt rang of relev call the univers.at present i have to make the new settler lydgat better known to anyon interest in him than he could possibl be even to those who hadseen the most of him sinc hi arriv in middlemarch. for sure allmust admit that a man mai be puf and belaud, envi, ridicul,count upon as a tool and fallen in love with, or at least select asa futur husband, and yet remain virtual unknown—known mere as aclust of sign for hi neighbor’ fals supposit. there wa agener impress, howev, that lydgat wa not altogeth a commoncountri doctor, and in middlemarch at that time such an impress wassignific of great thing be expect from him. for everybodi’sfamili doctor wa remark clever, and wa understood to haveimmeasur skill in the manag and train of the most skittishor viciou diseas. the evid of hi clever wa of the higherintuit order, ly in hi ladi-patient’ immov convict, andwa unassail by ani object except that their intuit wereoppos by other equal strong; each ladi who saw medic truth inwrench and “the strengthen treatment” regard toller and “thelow system” as medic perdit. for the heroic time of copiousbleed and blister had not yet depart, still less the time ofthorough-go theori, when diseas in gener wa call by some badnam, and treat accordingli without shilli-shalli—as if, for exampl,it were to be call insurrect, which must not be fire on withblank-cartridg, but have it blood drawn at onc. the strengthenersand the lower were all “clever” men in somebodi’s opinion, which isreal as much as can be said for ani live talent. nobodi’simagin had gone so far as to conjectur that mr. lydgat couldknow as much as dr. spragu and dr. minchin, the two physician, whoalon could offer ani hope when danger wa extrem, and when thesmallest hope wa worth a guinea. still, i repeat, there wa a generalimpress that lydgat wa someth rather more uncommon than anygener practition in middlemarch. and thi wa true. he wa butseven-and-twenti, an ag at which mani men ar not quit common—atwhich thei ar hope of achiev, resolut in avoid, thinkingthat mammon shall never put a bit in their mouth and get astrid theirback, but rather that mammon, if thei have anyth to do with him,shall draw their chariot.he had been left an orphan when he wa fresh from a public school. hisfath, a militari man, had made but littl provis for threechildren, and when the boi tertiu ask to have a medic educ,it seem easier to hi guardian to grant hi request by apprenticinghim to a countri practition than to make ani object on the scoreof famili digniti. he wa on of the rarer lad who earli get a decidedb and make up their mind that there is someth particular in lifewhich thei would like to do for it own sake, and not becaus theirfath did it. most of us who turn to ani subject with love remembersom morn or even hour when we got on a high stool to reach downan untri volum, or sat with part lip listen to a new talker,or for veri lack of book began to listen to the voic within, as thefirst traceabl begin of our love. someth of that sort happenedto lydgat. he wa a quick fellow, and when hot from plai, would tosshimself in a corner, and in five minut be deep in ani sort of bookthat he could lai hi hand on: if it were rassela or gulliv, somuch the better, but bailei’s dictionari would do, or the bibl withth apocrypha in it. someth he must read, when he wa not ride theponi, or run and hunt, or listen to the talk of men. all thiswa true of him at ten year of ag; he had then read through “chrysal,or the adventur of a guinea,” which wa neither milk for babe, norani chalki mixtur meant to pass for milk, and it had alreadi occurredto him that book were stuff, and that life wa stupid. hi schoolstudi had not much modifi that opinion, for though he “did” hisclass and mathemat, he wa not pre-emin in them. it wa saidof him, that lydgat could do anyth he like, but he had certainlynot yet like to do anyth remark. he wa a vigor anim witha readi understand, but no spark had yet kindl in him anintellectu passion; knowledg seem to him a veri superficialaffair, easili master: judg from the convers of hi elder,he had appar got alreadi more than wa necessari for matur life.probabl thi wa not an except result of expens teach atthat period of short-waist coat, and other fashion which have notyet recur. but, on vacat, a wet dai sent him to the small homelibrari to hunt onc more for a book which might have some freshnessfor him: in vain! unless, inde, he took down a dusti row of volumeswith grai-paper back and dingi label—the volum of an oldcyclopaedia which he had never disturb. it would at least be anovelti to disturb them. thei were on the highest shelf, and he stoodon a chair to get them down. but he open the volum which he firsttook from the shelf: somehow, on is apt to read in a makeshiftattitud, just where it might seem inconveni to do so. the page heopen on wa under the head of anatomi, and the first passag thatdrew hi ey wa on the valv of the heart. he wa not muchacquaint with valv of ani sort, but he knew that valva werefold-door, and through thi crevic came a sudden light startlinghim with hi first vivid notion of fine adjust mechan in thehuman frame. a liber educ had of cours left him free to readth indec passag in the school classic, but beyond a generalsens of secreci and obscen in connect with hi internalstructur, had left hi imagin quit unbiass, so that foranyth he knew hi brain lai in small bag at hi templ, and hehad no more thought of repres to himself how hi blood circulatedthan how paper serv instead of gold. but the moment of vocat hadcom, and befor he got down from hi chair, the world wa made new tohim by a presenti of endless process fill the vast spacesplank out of hi sight by that wordi ignor which he had supposedto be knowledg. from that hour lydgat felt the growth of anintellectu passion.we ar not afraid of tell over and over again how a man come tofal in love with a woman and be wed to her, or els be fatallypart from her. is it due to excess of poetri or of stupid that wear never weari of describ what king jame call a woman’s “makdomand her fairness,” never weari of listen to the twang of the oldtroubadour string, and ar compar uninterest in that otherkind of “makdom and fairness” which must be woo with industriousthought and patient renunci of small desir? in the stori of thispass, too, the develop vari: sometim it is the gloriousmarriag, sometim frustrat and final part. and not seldom thecatastroph is bound up with the other passion, sung by thetroubadour. for in the multitud of middl-ag men who go about theirvoc in a daili cours determin for them much in the same wai asth tie of their cravat, there is alwai a good number who onc meantto shape their own deed and alter the world a littl. the stori oftheir come to be shapen after the averag and fit to be pack by thegross, is hardli ever told even in their conscious; for perhapstheir ardor in gener unpaid toil cool as impercept as theardor of other youth love, till on dai their earlier self walkedlik a ghost in it old home and made the new furnitur ghastli.noth in the world more subtl than the process of their gradualchang! in the begin thei inhal it unknowingli: you and i mayhav sent some of our breath toward infect them, when we utteredour conform falsiti or drew our silli conclus: or perhap itcam with the vibrat from a woman’s glanc.lydgat did not mean to be on of those failur, and there wa thebett hope of him becaus hi scientif interest soon took the formof a profession enthusiasm: he had a youth belief in hisbread-win work, not to be stifl by that initi in makeshiftcal hi ’prentic dai; and he carri to hi studi in london,edinburgh, and pari, the convict that the medic profess as itmight be wa the finest in the world; present the most perfectinterchang between scienc and art; offer the most direct alliancebetween intellectu conquest and the social good. lydgat’s naturedemand thi combin: he wa an emot creatur, with aflesh-and-blood sens of fellowship which withstood all theabstract of special studi. he care not onli for “case,” but forjohn and elizabeth, especi elizabeth.there wa anoth attract in hi profess: it want reform, andgav a man an opportun for some indign resolv to reject itsven decor and other humbug, and to be the possessor of genuinethough undemand qualif. he went to studi in pari with thedetermin that when he came home again he would settl in someprovinci town as a gener practition, and resist the irrationalsever between medic and surgic knowledg in the interest of hisown scientif pursuit, as well as of the gener advanc: he wouldkeep awai from the rang of london intrigu, jealousi, and socialtruckl, and win celebr, howev slowli, as jenner had done, byth independ valu of hi work. for it must be rememb that thiswa a dark period; and in spite of vener colleg which us greateffort to secur puriti of knowledg by make it scarc, and toexclud error by a rigid exclus in relat to fee andappoint, it happen that veri ignor young gentlemen werepromot in town, and mani more got a legal right to practis overlarg area in the countri. also, the high standard held up to thepubl mind by the colleg of physician, which gave it peculiarsanct to the expens and highli rarefi medic instructionobtain by graduat of oxford and cambridg, did not hinder quackeryfrom have an excel time of it; for sinc profession practicechiefli consist in give a great mani drug, the public inferredthat it might be better off with more drug still, if thei could onlyb got cheapli, and henc swallow larg cubic measur of physicprescrib by unscrupul ignor which had taken no degre.consid that statist had not yet embrac a calcul as toth number of ignor or cant doctor which absolut must existin the teeth of all chang, it seem to lydgat that a chang in theunit wa the most direct mode of chang the number. he meant to bea unit who would make a certain amount of differ toward thatspread chang which would on dai tell appreci upon theaverag, and in the mean time have the pleasur of make anadvantag differ to the viscera of hi own patient. but he didnot simpli aim at a more genuin kind of practic than wa common. hewa ambiti of a wider effect: he wa fire with the possibl thath might work out the proof of an anatom concept and make a linkin the chain of discoveri.doe it seem incongru to you that a middlemarch surgeon should dreamof himself as a discover? most of us, inde, know littl of thegreat origin until thei have been lift up among theconstel and alreadi rule our fate. but that herschel, forexampl, who “broke the barrier of the heaven”—did he not onc plai aprovinci church-organ, and give music-lesson to stumbl pianist?each of those shine on had to walk on the earth among neighbor whoperhap thought much more of hi gait and hi garment than of anythingwhich wa to give him a titl to everlast fame: each of them had hislittl local person histori sprinkl with small temptat andsordid care, which made the retard friction of hi cours towardsfin companionship with the immort. lydgat wa not blind to thedang of such friction, but he had plenti of confid in hisresolut to avoid it as far as possibl: be seven-and-twenti, hefelt himself experienc. and he wa not go to have hi vanitiesprovok by contact with the showi worldli success of the capit,but to live among peopl who could hold no rivalri with that pursuit ofa great idea which wa to be a twin object with the assidu practiceof hi profess. there wa fascin in the hope that the twopurpos would illumin each other: the care observ andinfer which wa hi daili work, the us of the len to further hisjudg in special case, would further hi thought as an instrumentof larger inquiri. wa not thi the typic pre-emin of hisprofess? he would be a good middlemarch doctor, and by that verymean keep himself in the track of far-reach investig. on onepoint he mai fairli claim approv at thi particular stage of hiscar: he did not mean to imit those philanthrop model who makea profit out of poison pickl to support themselv while thei areexpos adulter, or hold share in a gambl-hell that thei mayhav leisur to repres the caus of public moral. he intend tobegin in hi own case some particular reform which were quitecertainli within hi reach, and much less of a problem than thedemonstr of an anatom concept. on of these reform wa toact stoutli on the strength of a recent legal decis, and simplyprescrib, without dispens drug or take percentag fromdruggist. thi wa an innov for on who had chosen to adopt thestyl of gener practition in a countri town, and would be felt asoffens critic by hi profession brethren. but lydgat meant toinnov in hi treatment also, and he wa wise enough to see that thebest secur for hi practis honestli accord to hi belief wasto get rid of systemat temptat to the contrari.perhap that wa a more cheer time for observ and theoriz thanth present; we ar apt to think it the finest era of the world whenamerica wa begin to be discov, when a bold sailor, even if hewer wreck, might alight on a new kingdom; and about 1829 the darkterritori of patholog were a fine america for a spirit youngadventur. lydgat wa ambiti abov all to contribut towardsenlarg the scientif, ration basi of hi profess. the more hebecam interest in special question of diseas, such as the natureof fever or fever, the more keenli he felt the need for thatfundament knowledg of structur which just at the begin of thecenturi had been illumin by the brief and gloriou career ofbichat, who di when he wa onli on-and-thirti, but, like anotheralexand, left a realm larg enough for mani heir. that greatfrenchman first carri out the concept that live bodi,fundament consid, ar not associ of organ which can beunderstood by studi them first apart, and then as it were feder;but must be regard as consist of certain primari web or tissu,out of which the variou organ—brain, heart, lung, and so on—arecompact, as the variou accommod of a hous ar built up invari proport of wood, iron, stone, brick, zinc, and the rest,each materi have it peculiar composit and proport. no man,on see, can understand and estim the entir structur or itspart—what ar it frailti and what it repair, without know thenatur of the materi. and the concept wrought out by bichat, withhi detail studi of the differ tissu, act necessarili onmed question as the turn of ga-light would act on a dim,oil-lit street, show new connect and hitherto hidden fact ofstructur which must be taken into account in consid the symptomsof maladi and the action of medica. but result which depend onhuman conscienc and intellig work slowli, and now at the end of1829, most medic practic wa still strut or shambl along theold path, and there wa still scientif work to be done which mighthav seem to be a direct sequenc of bichat’s. thi great seer didnot go beyond the consider of the tissu as ultim fact in theliv organ, mark the limit of anatom analysi; but it wasopen to anoth mind to sai, have not these structur some commonbasi from which thei have all start, as your sarsnet, gauz, net,satin, and velvet from the raw cocoon? here would be anoth light, asof oxi-hydrogen, show the veri grain of thing, and revis allform explan. of thi sequenc to bichat’s work, alreadyvibr along mani current of the european mind, lydgat wasenamour; he long to demonstr the more intim relat ofliv structur, and help to defin men’s thought more accuratelyaft the true order. the work had not yet been done, but onli preparedfor those who knew how to us the prepar. what wa the primitivetissu? in that wai lydgat put the question—not quit in the wayrequir by the await answer; but such miss of the right wordbefal mani seeker. and he count on quiet interv to bewatchfulli seiz, for take up the thread of investig—on manyhint to be won from dilig applic, not onli of the scalpel, butof the microscop, which research had begun to us again with newenthusiasm of relianc. such wa lydgat’s plan of hi futur: to dogood small work for middlemarch, and great work for the world.he wa certainli a happi fellow at thi time: to be seven-and-twenti,without ani fix vice, with a gener resolut that hi actionshould be benefic, and with idea in hi brain that made lifeinterest quit apart from the cultu of horseflesh and other mysticrit of costli observ, which the eight hundr pound left himaft bui hi practic would certainli not have gone far in payingfor. he wa at a start-point which make mani a man’s career a finesubject for bet, if there were ani gentlemen given to thatamus who could appreci the complic probabl of anardu purpos, with all the possibl thwart and further ofcircumst, all the niceti of inward balanc, by which a man swimsand make hi point or els is carri headlong. the risk would remaineven with close knowledg of lydgat’s charact; for charact too isa process and an unfold. the man wa still in the make, as much asth middlemarch doctor and immort discover, and there were bothvirtu and fault capabl of shrink or expand. the fault willnot, i hope, be a reason for the withdraw of your interest in him.among our valu friend is there not some on or other who is a littletoo self-confid and disdain; whose distinguish mind is a littlespot with common; who is a littl pinch here and protuberantther with nativ prejudic; or whose better energi ar liabl tolaps down the wrong channel under the influenc of transientsolicit? all these thing might be alleg against lydgat, butthen, thei ar the periphras of a polit preacher, who talk of adam,and would not like to mention anyth pain to the pew-renter. theparticular fault from which these delic gener ar distilledhav distinguish physiognomi, diction, accent, and grimac;fill up part in veri variou drama. our vaniti differ as ournos do: all conceit is not the same conceit, but vari incorrespond with the minutia of mental make in which on of usdiff from anoth. lydgat’s conceit wa of the arrog sort, neversimp, never impertin, but massiv in it claim andbenevol contemptu. he would do a great deal for noodl, beingsorri for them, and feel quit sure that thei could have no powerov him: he had thought of join the saint simonian when he wa inpari, in order to turn them against some of their own doctrin. allhi fault were mark by kindr trait, and were those of a man whohad a fine bariton, whose cloth hung well upon him, and who even inhi ordinari gestur had an air of inbr distinct. where then layth spot of common? sai a young ladi enamour of that carelessgrac. how could there be ani common in a man so well-bred, soambiti of social distinct, so gener and unusu in hi viewsof social duti? as easili as there mai be stupid in a man of geniusif you take him unawar on the wrong subject, or as mani a man who hasth best will to advanc the social millennium might be ill-inspir inimagin it lighter pleasur; unabl to go beyond offenbach’s music,or the brilliant pun in the last burlesqu. lydgat’s spot ofcommon lai in the complexion of hi prejudic, which, in spite ofnobl intent and sympathi, were half of them such as ar found inordinari men of the world: that distinct of mind which belong tohi intellectu ardor, did not penetr hi feel and judgmentabout furnitur, or women, or the desir of it be known(without hi tell) that he wa better born than other countrysurgeon. he did not mean to think of furnitur at present; butwhenev he did so it wa to be fear that neither biologi nor schemesof reform would lift him abov the vulgar of feel that therewould be an incompat in hi furnitur not be of the best.as to women, he had onc alreadi been drawn headlong by impetuousfolli, which he meant to be final, sinc marriag at some distantperiod would of cours not be impetu. for those who want to beacquaint with lydgat it will be good to know what wa that case ofimpetu folli, for it mai stand as an exampl of the fit swervingof passion to which he wa prone, togeth with the chivalr kindnesswhich help to make him moral lovabl. the stori can be told withoutmani word. it happen when he wa studi in pari, and just at thetim when, over and abov hi other work, he wa occupi with somegalvan experi. on even, tire with hi experi, andnot be abl to elicit the fact he need, he left hi frog andrabbit to some repos under their try and mysteri dispensationof unexplain shock, and went to finish hi even at the theatr ofth port saint martin, where there wa a melodrama which he hadalreadi seen sever time; attract, not by the ingeni work of thecollabor author, but by an actress whose part it wa to stab herlov, mistak him for the evil-design duke of the piec. lydgatewa in love with thi actress, as a man is in love with a woman whom henev expect to speak to. she wa a provencal, with dark ey, agreek profil, and round majest form, have that sort of beautywhich carri a sweet matronli even in youth, and her voic wa asoft coo. she had but late come to pari, and bore a virtuousreput, her husband act with her as the unfortun lover. itwa her act which wa “no better than it should be,” but the publicwa satisfi. lydgat’s onli relax now wa to go and look at thiswoman, just as he might have thrown himself under the breath of thesweet south on a bank of violet for a while, without prejudic to hisgalvan, to which he would present return. but thi even the olddrama had a new catastroph. at the moment when the heroin wa to actth stab of her lover, and he wa to fall gracefulli, the wifeverit stab her husband, who fell as death will. a wild shriekpierc the hous, and the provencal fell swoon: a shriek and aswoon were demand by the plai, but the swoon too wa real thistim. lydgat leap and climb, he hardli knew how, on to the stage,and wa activ in help, make the acquaint of hi heroin byfind a contus on her head and lift her gentli in hi arm.pari rang with the stori of thi death:—wa it a murder? some of theactress’s warmest admir were inclin to believ in her guilt, andlik her the better for it (such wa the tast of those time); butlydg wa not on of these. he vehement contend for herinnoc, and the remot imperson passion for her beauti which hehad felt befor, had pass now into person devot, and tenderthought of her lot. the notion of murder wa absurd: no motiv wasdiscover, the young coupl be understood to dote on each other;and it wa not unpreced that an accident slip of the foot shouldhav brought these grave consequ. the legal investig end inmadam laur’s releas. lydgat by thi time had had mani interviewswith her, and found her more and more ador. she talk littl; butthat wa an addit charm. she wa melancholi, and seem grate;her presenc wa enough, like that of the even light. lydgat wasmadli anxiou about her affect, and jealou lest ani other man thanhimself should win it and ask her to marri him. but instead ofreopen her engag at the port saint martin, where she wouldhav been all the more popular for the fatal episod, she left pariswithout warn, forsak her littl court of admir. perhap no onecarri inquiri far except lydgat, who felt that all scienc had cometo a stand-still while he imagin the unhappi laur, stricken byever-wander sorrow, herself wander, and find no faithfulcomfort. hidden actress, howev, ar not so difficult to find assom other hidden fact, and it wa not long befor lydgat gatheredind that laur had taken the rout to lyon. he found her atlast act with great success at avignon under the same name, lookingmor majest than ever as a forsaken wife carri her child in herarm. he spoke to her after the plai, wa receiv with the usualquietud which seem to him beauti as clear depth of water, andobtain leav to visit her the next dai; when he wa bent on tellingh that he ador her, and on ask her to marri him. he knew thatthi wa like the sudden impuls of a madman—incongru even with hishabitu foibl. no matter! it wa the on thing which he wa resolvedto do. he had two selv within him appar, and thei must learn toaccommod each other and bear reciproc impedi. strang, thatsom of us, with quick altern vision, see beyond our infatu,and even while we rave on the height, behold the wide plain where ourpersist self paus and await us.to have approach laur with ani suit that wa not reverentiallytend would have been simpli a contradict of hi whole feelingtoward her.“you have come all the wai from pari to find me?” she said to him thenext dai, sit befor him with fold arm, and look at him withey that seem to wonder as an untam rumin anim wonder.“ar all englishmen like that?”“i came becaus i could not live without try to see you. you arelon; i love you; i want you to consent to be my wife; i will wait,but i want you to promis that you will marri me—no on els.”laur look at him in silenc with a melancholi radianc from underh grand eyelid, until he wa full of raptur certainti, and kneltclos to her knee.“i will tell you someth,” she said, in her coo wai, keep herarm fold. “my foot realli slip.”“i know, i know,” said lydgat, deprecatingli. “it wa a fatalaccid—a dread stroke of calam that bound me to you the more.”again laur paus a littl and then said, slowli, “_i meant to doit._”lydgat, strong man as he wa, turn pale and trembl: moment seemedto pass befor he rose and stood at a distanc from her.“there wa a secret, then,” he said at last, even vehement. “he wasbrut to you: you hate him.”“no! he weari me; he wa too fond: he would live in pari, and not inmi countri; that wa not agreeabl to me.”“great god!” said lydgat, in a groan of horror. “and you plan tomurd him?”“i did not plan: it came to me in the plai—_i meant to do it._”lydgat stood mute, and unconsci press hi hat on while helook at her. he saw thi woman—the first to whom he had given hisyoung ador—amid the throng of stupid crimin.“you ar a good young man,” she said. “but i do not like husband. iwil never have anoth.”three dai afterward lydgat wa at hi galvan again in hi parischamb, believ that illus were at an end for him. he wa savedfrom harden effect by the abund kind of hi heart and hisbelief that human life might be made better. but he had more reasonthan ever for trust hi judgment, now that it wa so experienc;and henceforth he would take a strictli scientif view of woman,entertain no expect but such as were justifi beforehand.no on in middlemarch wa like to have such a notion of lydgat’spast as ha here been faintli shadow, and inde the respectabletownsfolk there were not more given than mortal gener to ani eagerattempt at exact in the represent to themselv of what didnot come under their own sens. not onli young virgin of that town,but grai-beard men also, were often in hast to conjectur how a newacquaint might be wrought into their purpos, content with veryvagu knowledg as to the wai in which life had been shape him forthat instrument. middlemarch, in fact, count on swallowinglydg and assimil him veri comfort.chapter xvi.“all that in woman is ador in thy fair self i find—for the whole sex can but afford the handsom and the kind.”—sir charl sedlei.the question whether mr. tyke should be appoint as salari chaplainto the hospit wa an excit topic to the middlemarch; andlydg heard it discuss in a wai that threw much light on the powerexercis in the town by mr. bulstrod. the banker wa evid arul, but there wa an opposit parti, and even among hi supportersther were some who allow it to be seen that their support wa acompromis, and who frankli state their impress that the generalschem of thing, and especi the casualti of trade, requir youto hold a candl to the devil.mr. bulstrod’s power wa not due simpli to hi be a countri banker,who knew the financi secret of most trader in the town and couldtouch the spring of their credit; it wa fortifi by a beneficencethat wa at onc readi and sever—readi to confer oblig, andsever in watch the result. he had gather, as an industri manalwai at hi post, a chief share in administ the town chariti,and hi privat chariti were both minut and abund. he would takea great deal of pain about apprent tegg the shoemak’s son, andh would watch over tegg’s church-go; he would defend mr. strypeth washerwoman against stubb’s unjust exact on the score of herdri-ground, and he would himself scrutin a calumni against mr.strype. hi privat minor loan were numer, but he would inquirestrictli into the circumst both befor and after. in thi wai aman gather a domain in hi neighbor’ hope and fear as well asgratitud; and power, when onc it ha got into that subtl region,propag itself, spread out of all proport to it externalmean. it wa a principl with mr. bulstrod to gain as much power asposs, that he might us it for the glori of god. he went through agreat deal of spiritu conflict and inward argument in order to adjusthi motiv, and make clear to himself what god’s glori requir. but,as we have seen, hi motiv were not alwai rightli appreci. therewer mani crass mind in middlemarch whose reflect scale could onlyweigh thing in the lump; and thei had a strong suspicion that sincemr. bulstrod could not enjoi life in their fashion, eat anddrink so littl as he did, and worret himself about everyth,he must have a sort of vampir’s feast in the sens of masteri.the subject of the chaplainci came up at mr. vinci’s tabl when lydgatewa dine there, and the famili connect with mr. bulstrod did not,he observ, prevent some freedom of remark even on the part of thehost himself, though hi reason against the propos arrangementturn entir on hi object to mr. tyke’s sermon, which were alldoctrin, and hi prefer for mr. farebroth, whose sermon werefre from that taint. mr. vinci like well enough the notion of thechaplain’s have a salari, suppos it were given to farebroth, whowa as good a littl fellow as ever breath, and the best preacheranywher, and companion too.“what line shall you take, then?” said mr. chich, the coron, agreat cours comrad of mr. vinci’s.“oh, i’m preciou glad i’m not on of the director now. i shall votefor refer the matter to the director and the medic boardtogeth. i shall roll some of my respons on your shoulder,doctor,” said mr. vinci, glanc first at dr. spragu, the seniorphysician of the town, and then at lydgat who sat opposit. “youmed gentlemen must consult which sort of black draught you willprescrib, eh, mr. lydgat?”“i know littl of either,” said lydgat; “but in gener, appointmentsar apt to be made too much a question of person like. the fittestman for a particular post is not alwai the best fellow or the mostagre. sometim, if you want to get a reform, your onli waywould be to pension off the good fellow whom everybodi is fond of, andput them out of the question.”dr. spragu, who wa consid the physician of most “weight,” thoughdr. minchin wa usual said to have more “penetr,” divest hislarg heavi face of all express, and look at hi wine-glass whilelydg wa speak. whatev wa not problemat and suspectedabout thi young man—for exampl, a certain showi as to foreignidea, and a disposit to unsettl what had been settl andforgotten by hi elder—wa posit unwelcom to a physician whosestand had been fix thirti year befor by a treatis onmening, of which at least on copi mark “own” wa bound in calf.for my part i have some fellow-feel with dr. spragu: on’sself-satisfact is an untax kind of properti which it is veryunpleas to find deprec.lydgat’s remark, howev, did not meet the sens of the compani. mr.vinci said, that if he could have _hi_ wai, he would not putdisagre fellow anywher.“hang your reform!” said mr. chich. “there’s no greater humbug inth world. you never hear of a reform, but it mean some trick to putin new men. i hope you ar not on of the ‘lancet’s’ men, mr.lydgat—want to take the coronership out of the hand of the legalprofess: your word appear to point that wai.”“i disapprov of waklei,” interpos dr. spragu, “no man more: he isan ill-intent fellow, who would sacrific the respect ofth profess, which everybodi know depend on the london colleg,for the sake of get some notorieti for himself. there ar men whodon’t mind about be kick blue if thei can onli get talk about.but waklei is right sometim,” the doctor ad, judici. “i couldment on or two point in which waklei is in the right.”“oh, well,” said mr. chich, “i blame no man for stand up in favorof hi own cloth; but, come to argument, i should like to know how acoron is to judg of evid if he ha not had a legal train?”“in my opinion,” said lydgat, “legal train onli make a man moreincompet in question that requir knowledg of anoth kind. peopletalk about evid as if it could realli be weigh in scale by ablind justic. no man can judg what is good evid on ani particularsubject, unless he know that subject well. a lawyer is no better thanan old woman at a post-mortem examin. how is he to know the actionof a poison? you might as well sai that scan vers will teach youto scan the potato crop.”“you ar awar, i suppos, that it is not the coron’s busi toconduct the _post-mortem_, but onli to take the evid of the medicalwit?” said mr. chich, with some scorn.“who is often almost as ignor as the coron himself,” said lydgat.“question of medic jurisprud ought not to be left to the chanceof decent knowledg in a medic wit, and the coron ought not tobe a man who will believ that strychnin will destroi the coat of thestomach if an ignor practition happen to tell him so.”lydgat had realli lost sight of the fact that mr. chich wa hismajesti’s coron, and end innoc with the question, “don’t youagre with me, dr. spragu?”“to a certain extent—with regard to popul district, and in themetropoli,” said the doctor. “but i hope it will be long befor thispart of the countri lose the servic of my friend chich, eventhough it might get the best man in our profess to succe him. i amsur vinci will agre with me.”“ye, ye, give me a coron who is a good cours man,” said mr.vinci, jovial. “and in my opinion, you’re safest with a lawyer.nobodi can know everyth. most thing ar ‘visit of god.’ and asto poison, why, what you want to know is the law. come, shall wejoin the ladi?”lydgat’s privat opinion wa that mr. chich might be the verycoron without bia as to the coat of the stomach, but he had notmeant to be person. thi wa on of the difficulti of move ingood middlemarch societi: it wa danger to insist on knowledg as aqualif for ani salari offic. fred vinci had call lydgat aprig, and now mr. chich wa inclin to call him prick-ear;especi when, in the draw-room, he seem to be make himselfemin agreeabl to rosamond, whom he had easili monopol in a_tête-à-tête_, sinc mr. vinci herself sat at the tea-tabl. sheresign no domest function to her daughter; and the matron’sbloom good-natur face, with the two volatil pink string floatingfrom her fine throat, and her cheeri manner to husband and children,wa certainli among the great attract of the vincyhous—attract which made it all the easier to fall in love with thedaught. the ting of unpretenti, inoffens vulgar in mr.vinci gave more effect to rosamond’s refin, which wa beyond whatlydg had expect.certainli, small feet and perfectli turn shoulder aid the impressionof refin manner, and the right thing said seem quit astonishinglyright when it is accompani with exquisit curv of lip and eyelid.and rosamond could sai the right thing; for she wa clever with thatsort of clever which catch everi tone except the humor.happili she never attempt to joke, and thi perhap wa the mostdecis mark of her clever.she and lydgat readili got into convers. he regret that he hadnot heard her sing the other dai at stone court. the onli pleasur heallow himself dure the latter part of hi stai in pari wa to goand hear music.“you have studi music, probabl?” said rosamond.“no, i know the note of mani bird, and i know mani melodi by ear;but the music that i don’t know at all, and have no notion about,delight me—affect me. how stupid the world is that it doe not makemor us of such a pleasur within it reach!”“ye, and you will find middlemarch veri tuneless. there ar hardli anygood musician. i onli know two gentlemen who sing at all well.”“i suppos it is the fashion to sing comic song in a rhythmic wai,leav you to fanci the tune—veri much as if it were tap on adrum?”“ah, you have heard mr. bowyer,” said rosamond, with on of her raresmil. “but we ar speak veri ill of our neighbor.”lydgat wa almost forget that he must carri on the convers,in think how love thi creatur wa, her garment seem to bemad out of the faintest blue sky, herself so immacul blond, as ifth petal of some gigant flower had just open and disclos her;and yet with thi infantin blond show so much readi,self-possess grace. sinc he had had the memori of laur, lydgat hadlost all tast for larg-ei silenc: the divin cow no longerattract him, and rosamond wa her veri opposit. but he recalledhimself.“you will let me hear some music to-night, i hope.”“i will let you hear my attempt, if you like,” said rosamond. “papa issur to insist on my sing. but i shall trembl befor you, who haveheard the best singer in pari. i have heard veri littl: i have onlyonc been to london. but our organist at st. peter’s is a goodmusician, and i go on studi with him.”“tell me what you saw in london.”“veri littl.” (a more naiv girl would have said, “oh, everyth!”but rosamond knew better.) “a few of the ordinari sight, such as rawcountri girl ar alwai taken to.”“do you call yourself a raw countri girl?” said lydgat, look at herwith an involuntari emphasi of admir, which made rosamond blushwith pleasur. but she remain simpli seriou, turn her long neck alittl, and put up her hand to touch her wondrou hair-plait—anhabitu gestur with her as pretti as ani movement of a kitten’s paw.not that rosamond wa in the least like a kitten: she wa a sylphcaught young and educ at mr. lemon’s.“i assur you my mind is raw,” she said immedi; “i pass atmiddlemarch. i am not afraid of talk to our old neighbor. but i amreal afraid of you.”“an accomplish woman almost alwai know more than we men, though herknowledg is of a differ sort. i am sure you could teach me athousand thing—as an exquisit bird could teach a bear if there wereani common languag between them. happili, there is a common languagebetween women and men, and so the bear can get taught.”“ah, there is fred begin to strum! i must go and hinder him fromjar all your nerv,” said rosamond, move to the other side ofth room, where fred have open the piano, at hi father’s desir,that rosamond might give them some music, wa parentheticallyperform “cherri ripe!” with on hand. abl men who have pass theirexamin will do these thing sometim, not less than the pluckedfr.“fred, prai defer your practis till to-morrow; you will make mr.lydgat ill,” said rosamond. “he ha an ear.”fred laugh, and went on with hi tune to the end.rosamond turn to lydgat, smile gentli, and said, “you perceiv,the bear will not alwai be taught.”“now then, rosi!” said fred, spring from the stool and twist itupward for her, with a hearti expect of enjoy. “some goodrous tune first.”rosamond plai admir. her master at mr. lemon’s school (close toa counti town with a memor histori that had it relic in churchand castl) wa on of those excel musician here and there to befound in our provinc, worthi to compar with mani a notedkapellmeist in a countri which offer more plenti condit ofmus celebr. rosamond, with the execut’s instinct, had seizedhi manner of plai, and gave forth hi larg render of noblemus with the precis of an echo. it wa almost startl, heard forth first time. a hidden soul seem to be flow forth fromrosamond’s finger; and so inde it wa, sinc soul live on inperpetu echo, and to all fine express there goe somewher anorigin activ, if it be onli that of an interpret. lydgat wastaken possess of, and began to believ in her as somethingexcept. after all, he thought, on need not be surpris to findth rare conjunct of natur under circumst apparentlyunfavor: come where thei mai, thei alwai depend on condit thatar not obviou. he sat look at her, and did not rise to pai her anycompli, leav that to other, now that hi admir wasdeepen.her sing wa less remark, but also well train, and sweet tohear as a chime perfectli in tune. it is true she sang “meet me bymoonlight,” and “i’ve been roam”; for mortal must share thefashion of their time, and none but the ancient can be alwaysclass. but rosamond could also sing “black-ei susan” with effect,or haydn’s canzonet, or “voi, che sapet,” or “batti, batti”—she onlyw to know what her audienc like.her father look round at the compani, delight in their admir.her mother sat, like a niob befor her troubl, with her youngestlittl girl on her lap, softli beat the child’s hand up and down intim to the music. and fred, notwithstand hi gener scepticismabout rosi, listen to her music with perfect allegi, wish hecould do the same thing on hi flute. it wa the pleasantest familyparti that lydgat had seen sinc he came to middlemarch. the vincyshad the readi to enjoi, the reject of all anxieti, and thebelief in life as a merri lot, which made a hous except in mostcounti town at that time, when evangel had cast a certainsuspicion as of plagu-infect over the few amus which survivedin the provinc. at the vinci’ there wa alwai whist, and thecard-tabl stood readi now, make some of the compani secretlyimpati of the music. befor it ceas mr. farebroth came in—ahandsom, broad-chest but otherwis small man, about forti, whoseblack wa veri threadbar: the brillianc wa all in hi quick grayey. he came like a pleasant chang in the light, arrest littlelouisa with fatherli nonsens as she wa be led out of the room bymiss morgan, greet everybodi with some special word, and seem tocondens more talk into ten minut than had been held all through theeven. he claim from lydgat the fulfil of a promis to comeand see him. “i can’t let you off, you know, becaus i have somebeetl to show you. we collector feel an interest in everi new mantil he ha seen all we have to show him.”but soon he swerv to the whist-tabl, rub hi hand and sai,“come now, let us be seriou! mr. lydgat? not plai? ah! you ar tooyoung and light for thi kind of thing.”lydgat said to himself that the clergyman whose abil were sopain to mr. bulstrod, appear to have found an agreeabl resort inthi certainli not erudit household. he could half understand it: thegood-humor, the good look of elder and younger, and the provis forpass the time without ani labor of intellig, might make thehous beguil to peopl who had no particular us for their oddhour.everyth look bloom and joyou except miss morgan, who wasbrown, dull, and resign, and altogeth, as mr. vinci often said,just the sort of person for a gover. lydgat did not mean to paymani such visit himself. thei were a wretch wast of the even;and now, when he had talk a littl more to rosamond, he meant toexcus himself and go.“you will not like us at middlemarch, i feel sure,” she said, when thewhist-player were settl. “we ar veri stupid, and you have been usedto someth quit differ.”“i suppos all countri town ar pretti much alik,” said lydgat. “buti have notic that on alwai believ on’s own town to be morestupid than ani other. i have made up my mind to take middlemarch as itcom, and shall be much oblig if the town will take me in the samewai. i have certainli found some charm in it which ar much greaterthan i had expect.”“you mean the ride toward tipton and lowick; everi on is pleasedwith those,” said rosamond, with simplic.“no, i mean someth much nearer to me.”rosamond rose and reach her net, and then said, “do you careabout danc at all? i am not quit sure whether clever men everd.”“i would danc with you if you would allow me.”“oh!” said rosamond, with a slight deprecatori laugh. “i wa onli goingto sai that we sometim have danc, and i want to know whether youwould feel insult if you were ask to come.”“not on the condit i mention.”after thi chat lydgat thought that he wa go, but on movingtoward the whist-tabl, he got interest in watch mr.farebroth’s plai, which wa masterli, and also hi face, which wa astrik mixtur of the shrewd and the mild. at ten o’clock supper wasbrought in (such were the custom of middlemarch) and there waspunch-drink; but mr. farebroth had onli a glass of water. he waswin, but there seem to be no reason why the renew of rubbersshould end, and lydgat at last took hi leav.but as it wa not eleven o’clock, he chose to walk in the brisk airtoward the tower of st. botolph’s, mr. farebroth’s church, whichstood out dark, squar, and massiv against the starlight. it wa theoldest church in middlemarch; the live, howev, wa but a vicarageworth bare four hundr a-year. lydgat had heard that, and hewond now whether mr. farebroth care about the monei he won atcard; think, “he seem a veri pleasant fellow, but bulstrod mayhav hi good reason.” mani thing would be easier to lydgat if itshould turn out that mr. bulstrod wa gener justifi. “what ishi religi doctrin to me, if he carri some good notion alongwith it? on must us such brain as ar to be found.”these were actual lydgat’s first medit as he walk awai frommr. vinci’s, and on thi ground i fear that mani ladi will considerhim hardli worthi of their attent. he thought of rosamond and hermus onli in the second place; and though, when her turn came, hedwelt on the imag of her for the rest of hi walk, he felt noagit, and had no sens that ani new current had set into hi life.he could not marri yet; he wish not to marri for sever year; andtherefor he wa not readi to entertain the notion of be in lovewith a girl whom he happen to admir. he did admir rosamondexceedingli; but that mad which had onc beset him about laur wasnot, he thought, like to recur in relat to ani other woman.certainli, if fall in love had been at all in question, it wouldhav been quit safe with a creatur like thi miss vinci, who had justth kind of intellig on would desir in a woman—polish, refin,docil, lend itself to finish in all the delicaci of life, andenshrin in a bodi which express thi with a forc of demonstrationthat exclud the need for other evid. lydgat felt sure that ifev he marri, hi wife would have that feminin radianc, thatdistinct womanhood which must be class with flower and music,that sort of beauti which by it veri natur wa virtuou, beingmould onli for pure and delic joi.but sinc he did not mean to marri for the next five year—hi morepress busi wa to look into loui’ new book on fever, which hewa special interest in, becaus he had known loui in pari, andhad follow mani anatom demonstr in order to ascertain thespecif differ of typhu and typhoid. he went home and read farinto the smallest hour, bring a much more test vision of detailsand relat into thi patholog studi than he had ever thought itnecessari to appli to the complex of love and marriag, theseb subject on which he felt himself ampli inform by literatur,and that tradit wisdom which is hand down in the genialconvers of men. wherea fever had obscur condit, and gave himthat delight labor of the imagin which is not merearbitrari, but the exercis of disciplin power—combin andconstruct with the clearest ey for probabl and the fullestobedi to knowledg; and then, in yet more energet allianc withimparti natur, stand aloof to invent test by which to try itsown work.mani men have been prais as vividli imagin on the strength oftheir profus in indiffer draw or cheap narrat:—report ofveri poor talk go on in distant orb; or portrait of lucif comingdown on hi bad errand as a larg ugli man with bat’s wing and spurtsof phosphoresc; or exagger of wanton that seem to reflectlif in a diseas dream. but these kind of inspir lydgateregard as rather vulgar and vinou compar with the imagin thatrev subtl action inaccess by ani sort of len, but track inthat outer dark through long pathwai of necessari sequenc by theinward light which is the last refin of energi, capabl of bathingeven the ether atom in it ideal illumin space. he for hispart had toss awai all cheap invent where ignor find itself and at eas: he wa enamour of that arduou invent which isth veri ey of research, provision frame it object andcorrect it to more and more exact of relat; he want topierc the obscur of those minut process which prepar humanmiseri and joi, those invis thoroughfar which ar the firstlurk-place of anguish, mania, and crime, that delic pois andtransit which determin the growth of happi or unhappyconsci.as he threw down hi book, stretch hi leg toward the ember in thegrat, and clasp hi hand at the back of hi head, in that agreeableafterglow of excit when thought laps from examin of aspecif object into a suffus sens of it connect with all therest of our exist—seem, as it were, to throw itself on it backaft vigor swim and float with the repos of unexhaustedstrength—lydgat felt a triumphant delight in hi studi, andsometh like piti for those less lucki men who were not of hisprofess.“if i had not taken that turn when i wa a lad,” he thought, “i mighthav got into some stupid draught-hors work or other, and live alwaysin blinker. i should never have been happi in ani profess that didnot call forth the highest intellectu strain, and yet keep me in goodwarm contact with my neighbor. there is noth like the medicalprofess for that: on can have the exclus scientif life thattouch the distanc and befriend the old fogi in the parish too. iti rather harder for a clergyman: farebroth seem to be an anomali.”thi last thought brought back the vinci and all the pictur of theeven. thei float in hi mind agreeabl enough, and as he took uphi bed-candl hi lip were curl with that incipi smile which isapt to accompani agreeabl recollect. he wa an ardent fellow, butat present hi ardor wa absorb in love of hi work and in theambit of make hi life recogn as a factor in the better lifeof mankind—like other hero of scienc who had noth but an obscurecountri practic to begin with.poor lydgat! or shall i sai, poor rosamond! each live in a world ofwhich the other knew noth. it had not occur to lydgat that hehad been a subject of eager medit to rosamond, who had neither anyreason for throw her marriag into distant perspect, nor anypatholog studi to divert her mind from that rumin habit,that inward repetit of look, word, and phrase, which make alarg part in the live of most girl. he had not meant to look at heror speak to her with more than the inevit amount of admir andcompli which a man must give to a beauti girl; inde, it seemedto him that hi enjoy of her music had remain almost silent, forh fear fall into the rude of tell her hi great surpriseat her possess of such accomplish. but rosamond had registeredeveri look and word, and estim them as the open incid of apreconceiv romanc—incid which gather valu from the foreseendevelop and climax. in rosamond’s romanc it wa not necessari toimagin much about the inward life of the hero, or of hi seriousbusi in the world: of cours, he had a profess and wa clever,as well as suffici handsom; but the piquant fact about lydgatewa hi good birth, which distinguish him from all middlemarchadmir, and present marriag as a prospect of rise in rank andget a littl nearer to that celesti condit on earth in whichsh would have noth to do with vulgar peopl, and perhap at lastassoci with rel quit equal to the counti peopl who lookeddown on the middlemarch. it wa part of rosamond’s clever todiscern veri subtli the faintest aroma of rank, and onc when she hadseen the miss brook accompani their uncl at the counti assiz,and seat among the aristocraci, she had envi them, notwithstandingtheir plain dress.if you think it incred that to imagin lydgat as a man of familycould caus thrill of satisfact which had anyth to do with thesens that she wa in love with him, i will ask you to us your powerof comparison a littl more effect, and consid whether red clothand epaulet have never had an influenc of that sort. our passion donot live apart in lock chamber, but, dress in their small wardrobeof notion, bring their provis to a common tabl and mess togeth,feed out of the common store accord to their appetit.rosamond, in fact, wa entir occupi not exactli with tertiuslydg as he wa in himself, but with hi relat to her; and it wasexcus in a girl who wa accustom to hear that all young menmight, could, would be, or actual were in love with her, to believeat onc that lydgat could be no except. hi look and word meantmor to her than other men’s, becaus she care more for them: shethought of them dilig, and dilig attend to that perfectionof appear, behavior, sentiment, and all other eleg, whichwould find in lydgat a more adequ admir than she had yet beenconsci of.for rosamond, though she would never do anyth that wa disagreeableto her, wa industri; and now more than ever she wa activ insketch her landscap and market-cart and portrait of friend, inpractis her music, and in be from morn till night her ownstandard of a perfect ladi, have alwai an audienc in her ownconsci, with sometim the not unwelcom addit of a morevari extern audienc in the numer visitor of the hous. shefound time also to read the best novel, and even the second best, andsh knew much poetri by heart. her favorit poem wa “lalla rookh.”“the best girl in the world! he will be a happi fellow who get her!”wa the sentiment of the elderli gentlemen who visit the vinci; andth reject young men thought of try again, as is the fashion incountri town where the horizon is not thick with come rival. butmr. plymdal thought that rosamond had been educ to a ridiculouspitch, for what wa the us of accomplish which would be all laidasid as soon as she wa marri? while her aunt bulstrod, who had asisterli faith toward her brother’s famili, had two sincerewish for rosamond—that she might show a more seriou turn of mind,and that she might meet with a husband whose wealth correspond to herhabit.chapter xvii.“the clerkli person smile and saidpromis wa a pretti maid,but be poor she di unw.”the rev. camden farebroth, whom lydgat went to see the next even,live in an old parsonag, built of stone, vener enough to matchth church which it look out upon. all the furnitur too in the housewa old, but with anoth grade of ag—that of mr. farebroth’s fatherand grandfath. there were paint white chair, with gild andwreath on them, and some linger red silk damask with slit in it.there were engrav portrait of lord chancellor and other celebratedlawy of the last centuri; and there were old pier-glass to reflectthem, as well as the littl satin-wood tabl and the sofa resemblinga prolong of uneasi chair, all stand in relief against thedark wainscot. thi wa the physiognomi of the draw-room into whichlydg wa shown; and there were three ladi to receiv him, who werealso old-fashion, and of a fade but genuin respect: mr.farebroth, the vicar’s white-hair mother, befril and kerchiefedwith dainti cleanli, upright, quick-ei, and still under seventi;miss nobl, her sister, a tini old ladi of meeker aspect, with frillsand kerchief decidedli more worn and mend; and miss winifredfarebroth, the vicar’s elder sister, well-look like himself, butnip and subdu as singl women ar apt to be who spend their livesin uninterrupt subject to their elder. lydgat had not expectedto see so quaint a group: know simpli that mr. farebroth wa abachelor, he had thought of be usher into a snuggeri where thechief furnitur would probabl be book and collect of naturalobject. the vicar himself seem to wear rather a chang aspect, asmost men do when acquaint made elsewher see them for the firsttim in their own home; some inde show like an actor of genialpart disadvantag cast for the curmudgeon in a new piec. thiswa not the case with mr. farebroth: he seem a trifl milder andmor silent, the chief talker be hi mother, while he onli put in agood-humor moder remark here and there. the old ladi wasevid accustom to tell her compani what thei ought to think, andto regard no subject as quit safe without her steer. she wasafford leisur for thi function by have all her littl wantsattend to by miss winifr. meanwhil tini miss nobl carri on herarm a small basket, into which she divert a bit of sugar, which shehad first drop in her saucer as if by mistak; look roundfurt afterward, and revert to her teacup with a small innocentnois as of a tini timid quadrup. prai think no ill of miss nobl.that basket held small save from her more portabl food, destinedfor the children of her poor friend among whom she trot on finemorn; foster and pet all needi creatur be sospontan a delight to her, that she regard it much as if it hadbeen a pleasant vice that she wa addict to. perhap she wasconsci of be tempt to steal from those who had much that shemight give to those who had noth, and carri in her conscienc theguilt of that repress desir. on must be poor to know the luxuri ofgiv!mr. farebroth welcom the guest with a live formal andprecis. she present inform him that thei were not often in wantof medic aid in that hous. she had brought up her children to wearflannel and not to over-eat themselv, which last habit she consideredth chief reason why peopl need doctor. lydgat plead for thosewhos father and mother had over-eaten themselv, but mr.farebroth held that view of thing danger: natur wa more justthan that; it would be easi for ani felon to sai that hi ancestorsought to have been hang instead of him. if those who had bad fathersand mother were bad themselv, thei were hang for that. there wasno need to go back on what you couldn’t see.“my mother is like old georg the third,” said the vicar, “she objectsto metaphys.”“i object to what is wrong, camden. i sai, keep hold of a few plaintruth, and make everyth squar with them. when i wa young, mr.lydgat, there never wa ani question about right and wrong. we knewour catech, and that wa enough; we learn our creed and our duti.everi respect church person had the same opinion. but now, if youspeak out of the prayer-book itself, you ar liabl to becontradict.”“that make rather a pleasant time of it for those who like to maintaintheir own point,” said lydgat.“but my mother alwai give wai,” said the vicar, slyli.“no, no, camden, you must not lead mr. lydgat into a mistak about_me_. i shall never show that disrespect to my parent, to give up whatthei taught me. ani on mai see what come of turn. if you changeonc, why not twenti time?”“a man might see good argument for chang onc, and not see them forchang again,” said lydgat, amus with the decis old ladi.“excus me there. if you go upon argument, thei ar never want,when a man ha no constanc of mind. my father never chang, and hepreach plain moral sermon without argument, and wa a good man—fewbett. when you get me a good man made out of argument, i will getyou a good dinner with read you the cookeri-book. that’s my opinion,and i think anybodi’s stomach will bear me out.”“about the dinner certainli, mother,” said mr. farebroth.“it is the same thing, the dinner or the man. i am nearli seventi, mr.lydgat, and i go upon experi. i am not like to follow newlight, though there ar plenti of them here as elsewher. i sai, theycam in with the mix stuff that will neither wash nor wear. it wasnot so in my youth: a churchman wa a churchman, and a clergyman, youmight be pretti sure, wa a gentleman, if noth els. but now he mayb no better than a dissent, and want to push asid my son onpret of doctrin. but whoever mai wish to push him asid, i amproud to sai, mr. lydgat, that he will compar with ani preacher inthi kingdom, not to speak of thi town, which is but a low standard togo by; at least, to my think, for i wa born and bred at exet.”“a mother is never partial,” said mr. farebroth, smile. “what doyou think tyke’s mother sai about him?”“ah, poor creatur! what inde?” said mr. farebroth, her sharpnessblunt for the moment by her confid in matern judgment. “shesai the truth to herself, depend upon it.”“and what is the truth?” said lydgat. “i am curiou to know.”“oh, noth bad at all,” said mr. farebroth. “he is a zealousfellow: not veri learn, and not veri wise, i think—becaus i don’tagre with him.”“why, camden!” said miss winifr, “griffin and hi wife told me onlyto-dai, that mr. tyke said thei should have no more coal if thei cameto hear you preach.”mr. farebroth laid down her knit, which she had resum afterh small allow of tea and toast, and look at her son as if tosai “you hear that?” miss nobl said, “oh poor thing! poor thing!” inrefer, probabl, to the doubl loss of preach and coal. but thevicar answer quietli—“that is becaus thei ar not my parishion. and i don’t think mysermon ar worth a load of coal to them.”“mr. lydgat,” said mr. farebroth, who could not let thi pass, “youdon’t know my son: he alwai undervalu himself. i tell him he isundervalu the god who made him, and made him a most excellentpreach.”“that must be a hint for me to take mr. lydgat awai to my studi,mother,” said the vicar, laugh. “i promis to show you mycollect,” he ad, turn to lydgat; “shall we go?”all three ladi remonstr. mr. lydgat ought not to be hurri awaywithout be allow to accept anoth cup of tea: miss winifr hadabund of good tea in the pot. why wa camden in such hast to takea visitor to hi den? there wa noth but pickl vermin, and drawersful of blue-bottl and moth, with no carpet on the floor. mr.lydgat must excus it. a game at cribbag would be far better. inshort, it wa plain that a vicar might be ador by hi womankind asth king of men and preacher, and yet be held by them to stand in muchne of their direct. lydgat, with the usual shallow of a youngbachelor, wonder that mr. farebroth had not taught them better.“my mother is not us to my have visitor who can take ani interestin my hobbi,” said the vicar, as he open the door of hi studi,which wa inde as bare of luxuri for the bodi as the ladi hadimpli, unless a short porcelain pipe and a tobacco-box were to beexcept.“men of your profess don’t gener smoke,” he said. lydgat smiledand shook hi head. “nor of mine either, properli, i suppos. you willhear that pipe alleg against me by bulstrod and compani. thei don’tknow how pleas the devil would be if i gave it up.”“i understand. you ar of an excit temper and want a sed. i amheavi, and should get idl with it. i should rush into idl, andstagn there with all my might.”“and you mean to give it all to your work. i am some ten or twelveyear older than you, and have come to a compromis. i feed a weaknessor two lest thei should get clamor. see,” continu the vicar,open sever small drawer, “i fanci i have made an exhaust studyof the entomolog of thi district. i am go on both with the faunaand flora; but i have at least done my insect well. we ar singularlyrich in orthoptera: i don’t know whether—ah! you have got hold of thatglass jar—you ar look into that instead of my drawer. you don’trealli care about these thing?”“not by the side of thi love anencephal monster. i have never hadtim to give myself much to natur histori. i wa earli bitten with aninterest in structur, and it is what li most directli in myprofess. i have no hobbi besid. i have the sea to swim in there.”“ah! you ar a happi fellow,” said mr. farebroth, turn on hi heeland begin to fill hi pipe. “you don’t know what it is to wantspiritu tobacco—bad emend of old text, or small item about avarieti of aphi brassica, with the well-known signatur ofphilomicron, for the ‘twaddler’s magazin;’ or a learn treatis onth entomolog of the pentateuch, includ all the insect notment, but probabl met with by the israelit in their passagethrough the desert; with a monograph on the ant, as treat by solomon,show the harmoni of the book of proverb with the result of modernresearch. you don’t mind my fumig you?”lydgat wa more surpris at the open of thi talk than at itsimpli mean—that the vicar felt himself not altogeth in the rightvoc. the neat fit-up of drawer and shelv, and the bookcasefil with expens illustr book on natur histori, made himthink again of the win at card and their destin. but he wasbegin to wish that the veri best construct of everyth thatmr. farebroth did should be the true on. the vicar’s franknessseem not of the repuls sort that come from an uneasyconsci seek to forestal the judgment of other, but simplyth relief of a desir to do with as littl pretenc as possibl.appar he wa not without a sens that hi freedom of speech mightseem prematur, for he present said—“i have not yet told you that i have the advantag of you, mr. lydgat,and know you better than you know me. you rememb trawlei who sharedyour apart at pari for some time? i wa a correspond of hi,and he told me a good deal about you. i wa not quit sure when youfirst came that you were the same man. i wa veri glad when i foundthat you were. onli i don’t forget that you have not had the likeprologu about me.”lydgat divin some delicaci of feel here, but did not halfunderstand it. “by the wai,” he said, “what ha becom of trawlei? ihav quit lost sight of him. he wa hot on the french social system,and talk of go to the backwood to found a sort of pythagoreancommun. is he gone?”“not at all. he is practis at a german bath, and ha marri a richpati.”“then my notion wear the best, so far,” said lydgat, with a shortscorn laugh. “he would have it, the medic profess wa aninevit system of humbug. i said, the fault wa in the men—men whotruckl to li and folli. instead of preach against humbug outsideth wall, it might be better to set up a disinfect apparatuswithin. in short—i am report my own convers—you mai be sure ihad all the good sens on my side.”“your scheme is a good deal more difficult to carri out than thepythagorean commun, though. you have not onli got the old adam inyourself against you, but you have got all those descend of theorigin adam who form the societi around you. you see, i have paidtwelv or thirteen year more than you for my knowledg ofdifficulti. but”—mr. farebroth broke off a moment, and then ad,“you ar ei that glass vase again. do you want to make an exchang?you shall not have it without a fair barter.”“i have some sea-mice—fine specimen—in spirit. and i will throw inrobert brown’s new thing—‘microscop observ on the pollen ofplant’—if you don’t happen to have it alreadi.”“why, see how you long for the monster, i might ask a higher price.suppos i ask you to look through my drawer and agre with me aboutal my new speci?” the vicar, while he talk in thi wai,altern move about with hi pipe in hi mouth, and return tohang rather fondli over hi drawer. “that would be good disciplin,you know, for a young doctor who ha to pleas hi patient inmiddlemarch. you must learn to be bore, rememb. howev, you shallhav the monster on your own term.”“don’t you think men overr the necess for humor everybodi’snonsens, till thei get despis by the veri fool thei humor?” saidlydg, move to mr. farebroth’s side, and look rather absentlyat the insect rang in fine gradat, with name subscrib inexquisit write. “the shortest wai is to make your valu felt, sothat peopl must put up with you whether you flatter them or not.”“with all my heart. but then you must be sure of have the valu, andyou must keep yourself independ. veri few men can do that. eithery slip out of servic altogeth, and becom good for noth, or youwear the har and draw a good deal where your yoke-fellow pull you.but do look at these delic orthoptera!”lydgat had after all to give some scrutini to each drawer, the vicarlaugh at himself, and yet persist in the exhibit.“apropo of what you said about wear har,” lydgat began, afterthei had sat down, “i made up my mind some time ago to do with aslittl of it as possibl. that wa why i determin not to try anythingin london, for a good mani year at least. i didn’t like what i sawwhen i wa studi there—so much empti bigwigg, and obstructivetrickeri. in the countri, peopl have less pretens to knowledg, andar less of companion, but for that reason thei affect on’samour-propr less: on make less bad blood, and can follow on’s owncours more quietli.”“ye—well—you have got a good start; you ar in the right profess,the work you feel yourself most fit for. some peopl miss that, andrep too late. but you must not be too sure of keep yourindepend.”“you mean of famili ti?” said lydgat, conceiv that these mightpress rather tightli on mr. farebroth.“not altogeth. of cours thei make mani thing more difficult. but agood wife—a good unworldli woman—mai realli help a man, and keep himmor independ. there’s a parishion of mine—a fine fellow, but whowould hardli have pull through as he ha done without hi wife. doyou know the garth? i think thei were not peacock’s patient.”“no; but there is a miss garth at old featherston’s, at lowick.”“their daughter: an excel girl.”“she is veri quiet—i have hardli notic her.”“she ha taken notic of you, though, depend upon it.”“i don’t understand,” said lydgat; he could hardli sai “of cours.”“oh, she gaug everybodi. i prepar her for confirm—she is afavorit of mine.”mr. farebroth puf a few moment in silenc, lydgat not care toknow more about the garth. at last the vicar laid down hi pipe,stretch out hi leg, and turn hi bright ey with a smile towardslydg, sai—“but we middlemarch ar not so tame as you take us to be. we haveour intrigu and our parti. i am a parti man, for exampl, andbulstrod is anoth. if you vote for me you will offend bulstrod.”“what is there against bulstrod?” said lydgat, emphat.“i did not sai there wa anyth against him except that. if you voteagainst him you will make him your enemi.”“i don’t know that i need mind about that,” said lydgat, ratherproudli; “but he seem to have good idea about hospit, and hespend larg sum on us public object. he might help me a gooddeal in carri out my idea. as to hi religi notion—why, asvoltair said, incant will destroi a flock of sheep ifadminist with a certain quantiti of arsen. i look for the man whowil bring the arsen, and don’t mind about hi incant.”“veri good. but then you must not offend your arsen-man. you will notoffend me, you know,” said mr. farebroth, quit unaffectedli. “idon’t translat my own conveni into other peopl’s duti. i amoppos to bulstrod in mani wai. i don’t like the set he belong to:thei ar a narrow ignor set, and do more to make their neighborsuncomfort than to make them better. their system is a sort ofworldli-spiritu cliqueism: thei realli look on the rest of mankind asa doom carcass which is to nourish them for heaven. but,” he ad,smilingli, “i don’t sai that bulstrod’s new hospit is a bad thing;and as to hi want to oust me from the old on—why, if he think mea mischiev fellow, he is onli return a compliment. and i am not amodel clergyman—onli a decent makeshift.”lydgat wa not at all sure that the vicar malign himself. a modelclergyman, like a model doctor, ought to think hi own profess thefinest in the world, and take all knowledg as mere nourish to hismor patholog and therapeut. he onli said, “what reason doesbulstrod give for supersed you?”“that i don’t teach hi opinion—which he call spiritu religion; andthat i have no time to spare. both statement ar true. but then icould make time, and i should be glad of the forti pound. that is theplain fact of the case. but let us dismiss it. i onli want to tellyou that if you vote for your arsen-man, you ar not to cut me inconsequ. i can’t spare you. you ar a sort of circumnavig cometo settl among us, and will keep up my belief in the antipod. nowtel me all about them in pari.”chapter xviii.“oh, sir, the loftiest hope on earthdraw lot with meaner hope: heroic breast,breath bad air, run risk of pestil;or, lack lime-juic when thei cross the line,mai languish with the scurvi.”some week pass after thi convers befor the question of thechaplainci gather ani practic import for lydgat, and withouttel himself the reason, he defer the predetermin on whichsid he should give hi vote. it would realli have been a matter oftot indiffer to him—that is to sai, he would have taken the moreconveni side, and given hi vote for the appoint of tyke withoutani hesit—if he had not care person for mr. farebroth.but hi like for the vicar of st. botolph’s grew with growingacquaintanceship. that, enter into lydgat’s posit as a new-comerwho had hi own profession object to secur, mr. farebroth shouldhav taken pain rather to warn off than to obtain hi interest, showedan unusu delicaci and generos, which lydgat’s natur wa keenlyal to. it went along with other point of conduct in mr. farebrotherwhich were exception fine, and made hi charact resembl thosesouthern landscap which seem divid between natur grandeur andsoci slovenli. veri few men could have been as filial andchivalr as he wa to the mother, aunt, and sister, whose dependenceon him had in mani wai shape hi life rather uneasili for himself;few men who feel the pressur of small need ar so nobli resolut notto dress up their inevit self-interest desir in a pretext ofbett motiv. in these matter he wa consciou that hi life wouldbear the closest scrutini; and perhap the conscious encourag alittl defianc toward the critic strict of person whosecelesti intimaci seem not to improv their domest manner, andwhos lofti aim were not need to account for their action. then,hi preach wa ingeni and pithi, like the preach of theenglish church in it robust ag, and hi sermon were deliveredwithout book. peopl outsid hi parish went to hear him; and, sinc tofil the church wa alwai the most difficult part of a clergyman’sfunction, here wa anoth ground for a careless sens of superior.besid, he wa a likabl man: sweet-temper, readi-wit, frank,without grin of suppress bitter or other convers flavorswhich make half of us an afflict to our friend. lydgat like himheartili, and wish for hi friendship.with thi feel uppermost, he continu to waiv the question of thechaplainci, and to persuad himself that it wa not onli no properbusi of hi, but like enough never to vex him with a demand forhi vote. lydgat, at mr. bulstrod’s request, wa lai down plansfor the intern arrang of the new hospit, and the two wereoften in consult. the banker wa alwai presuppos that he couldcount in gener on lydgat as a coadjutor, but made no specialrecurr to the come decis between tyke and farebroth. whenth gener board of the infirmari had met, howev, and lydgat hadnotic that the question of the chaplainci wa thrown on a council ofth director and medic men, to meet on the follow fridai, he hada vex sens that he must make up hi mind on thi trivial middlemarchbusi. he could not help hear within him the distinct declarationthat bulstrod wa prime minist, and that the tyke affair wa aquest of offic or no offic; and he could not help an equallypronounc dislik to give up the prospect of offic. for hisobserv wa constantli confirm mr. farebroth’s assur thatth banker would not overlook opposit. “confound their pettypolit!” wa on of hi thought for three morn in the meditativeprocess of shave, when he had begun to feel that he must realli holda court of conscienc on thi matter. certainli there were valid thingsto be said against the elect of mr. farebroth: he had too much onhi hand alreadi, especi consid how much time he spent onnon-cleric occup. then again it wa a continu repeatedshock, disturb lydgat’s esteem, that the vicar should obviouslyplai for the sake of monei, like the plai inde, but evidentlylik some end which it serv. mr. farebroth contend on theoryfor the desir of all game, and said that englishmen’s wit wasstagn for want of them; but lydgat felt certain that he would haveplai veri much less but for the monei. there wa a billiard-room atth green dragon, which some anxiou mother and wive regard as thechief temptat in middlemarch. the vicar wa a first-ratebilliard-player, and though he did not frequent the green dragon, therewer report that he had sometim been there in the daytim and hadwon monei. and as to the chaplainci, he did not pretend that he caredfor it, except for the sake of the forti pound. lydgat wa nopuritan, but he did not care for plai, and win monei at it hadalwai seem a mean to him; besid, he had an ideal of life whichmad thi subservi of conduct to the gain of small sumsthoroughli hate to him. hitherto in hi own life hi want had beensuppli without ani troubl to himself, and hi first impuls wasalwai to be liber with half-crown as matter of no import to agentleman; it had never occur to him to devis a plan for gettinghalf-crown. he had alwai known in a gener wai that he wa not rich,but he had never felt poor, and he had no power of imagin the partwhich the want of monei plai in determin the action of men. moneyhad never been a motiv to him. henc he wa not readi to frame excusesfor thi deliber pursuit of small gain. it wa altogeth repulsiveto him, and he never enter into ani calcul of the ratio betweenth vicar’s incom and hi more or less necessari expenditur. it wasposs that he would not have made such a calcul in hi owncas.and now, when the question of vote had come, thi repuls fact toldmor strongli against mr. farebroth than it had done befor. onewould know much better what to do if men’s charact were moreconsist, and especi if on’s friend were invari fit for anyfunct thei desir to undertak! lydgat wa convinc that if therehad been no valid object to mr. farebroth, he would have vote forhim, whatev bulstrod might have felt on the subject: he did notintend to be a vassal of bulstrod’s. on the other hand, there wastyk, a man entir given to hi cleric offic, who wa simplycur at a chapel of eas in st. peter’s parish, and had time forextra duti. nobodi had anyth to sai against mr. tyke, except thatthei could not bear him, and suspect him of cant. realli, from hispoint of view, bulstrod wa thoroughli justifi.but whichev wai lydgat began to inclin, there wa someth to makehim winc; and be a proud man, he wa a littl exasper at beingoblig to winc. he did not like frustrat hi own best purpos byget on bad term with bulstrod; he did not like vote againstfarebroth, and help to depriv him of function and salari; and thequest occur whether the addit forti pound might not leaveth vicar free from that ignobl care about win at card. moreov,lydgat did not like the conscious that in vote for tyke heshould be vote on the side obvious conveni for himself. butwould the end realli be hi own conveni? other peopl would sai so,and would alleg that he wa curri favor with bulstrod for the sakeof make himself import and get on in the world. what then? hefor hi own part knew that if hi person prospect simpli had beenconcern, he would not have care a rotten nut for the banker’sfriendship or enmiti. what he realli care for wa a medium for hiswork, a vehicl for hi idea; and after all, wa he not bound topref the object of get a good hospit, where he coulddemonstr the specif distinct of fever and test therapeuticresult, befor anyth els connect with thi chaplainci? for thefirst time lydgat wa feel the hamper threadlik pressur ofsmal social condit, and their frustrat complex. at the endof hi inward debat, when he set out for the hospit, hi hope wasreal in the chanc that discuss might somehow give a new aspect toth question, and make the scale dip so as to exclud the necess forvot. i think he trust a littl also to the energi which isbegotten by circumst—some feel rush warmli and makingresolv easi, while debat in cool blood had onli made it moredifficult. howev it wa, he did not distinctli sai to himself onwhich side he would vote; and all the while he wa inwardli resentingth subject which had been forc upon him. it would have seemedbeforehand like a ridicul piec of bad logic that he, with hisunmix resolut of independ and hi select purpos, would findhimself at the veri outset in the grasp of petti altern, each ofwhich wa repugn to him. in hi student’s chamber, he hadprearrang hi social action quit differ.lydgat wa late in set out, but dr. spragu, the two othersurgeon, and sever of the director had arriv earli; mr.bulstrod, treasur and chairman, be among those who were stillabs. the convers seem to impli that the issu wasproblemat, and that a major for tyke wa not so certain as hadbeen gener suppos. the two physician, for a wonder, turn outto be unanim, or rather, though of differ mind, thei concurredin action. dr. spragu, the rug and weighti, wa, as everi on hadforeseen, an adher of mr. farebroth. the doctor wa more thansuspect of have no religion, but somehow middlemarch toler thisdefici in him as if he had been a lord chancellor; inde it isprob that hi profession weight wa the more believ in, theworld-old associ of clever with the evil principl be stillpot in the mind even of ladi-patient who had the strictest ideasof frill and sentiment. it wa perhap thi negat in the doctorwhich made hi neighbor call him hard-head and dry-wit;condit of textur which were also held favor to the store ofjudg connect with drug. at all event, it is certain that ifani medic man had come to middlemarch with the reput of havingveri definit religi view, of be given to prayer, and ofotherwis show an activ pieti, there would have been a generalpresumpt against hi medic skill.on thi ground it wa (profession speak) fortun for dr.minchin that hi religi sympathi were of a gener kind, and sucha gave a distant medic sanction to all seriou sentiment, whether ofchurch or dissent, rather than ani adhes to particular tenet. ifmr. bulstrod insist, as he wa apt to do, on the lutheran doctrineof justif, as that by which a church must stand or fall, dr.minchin in return wa quit sure that man wa not a mere machin or afortuit conjunct of atom; if mr. wimpl insist on aparticular provid in relat to her stomach complaint, dr. minchinfor hi part like to keep the mental window open and object tofix limit; if the unitarian brewer jest about the athanasiancre, dr. minchin quot pope’s “essai on man.” he object to therath free style of anecdot in which dr. spragu indulg, preferringwel-sanction quotat, and like refin of all kind: it wasgener known that he had some kinship to a bishop, and sometimessp hi holidai at “the palac.”dr. minchin wa soft-hand, pale-complexion, and of round outlin,not to be distinguish from a mild clergyman in appear: whereasdr. spragu wa superflu tall; hi trouser got creas at thekne, and show an excess of boot at a time when strap seemednecessari to ani digniti of bear; you heard him go in and out, andup and down, as if he had come to see after the roof. in short, hehad weight, and might be expect to grappl with a diseas and throwit; while dr. minchin might be better abl to detect it lurk and tocircumv it. thei enjoi about equal the mysteri privileg ofmed reput, and conceal with much etiquett their contemptfor each other’s skill. regard themselv as middlemarchinstitut, thei were readi to combin against all innov, andagainst non-profession given to interfer. on thi ground theywer both in their heart equal avers to mr. bulstrod, though dr.minchin had never been in open hostil with him, and never differedfrom him without elabor explan to mr. bulstrod, who had foundthat dr. minchin alon understood her constitut. a layman who priedinto the profession conduct of medic men, and wa alwai obtrudinghi reform,—though he wa less directli embarrass to the twophysician than to the surgeon-apothecari who attend pauper bycontract, wa nevertheless offens to the profession nostril assuch; and dr. minchin share fulli in the new piqu against bulstrod,excit by hi appar determin to patron lydgat. thelong-establish practition, mr. wrench and mr. toller; were justnow stand apart and have a friendli colloqui, in which thei agreedthat lydgat wa a jackanap, just made to serv bulstrod’s purpos.to non-medic friend thei had alreadi concur in prais the otheryoung practition, who had come into the town on mr. peacock’sretir without further recommend than hi own merit and suchargu for solid profession acquir as might be gather fromhi have appar wast no time on other branch of knowledg. itwa clear that lydgat, by not dispens drug, intend to castimput on hi equal, and also to obscur the limit between hisown rank as a gener practition and that of the physician, who, inth interest of the profess, felt bound to maintain it variousgrad,—especi against a man who had not been to either of theenglish univers and enjoi the absenc of anatom and bedsidestudi there, but came with a libel pretens to experi inedinburgh and pari, where observ might be abund inde, buthardli sound.thu it happen that on thi occas bulstrod becam identifi withlydg, and lydgat with tyke; and ow to thi varieti ofinterchang name for the chaplainci question, divers mind wereen to form the same judgment concern it.dr. spragu said at onc bluntli to the group assembl when heenter, “i go for farebroth. a salari, with all my heart. but whytak it from the vicar? he ha none too much—ha to insur hi life,besid keep hous, and do a vicar’s chariti. put forti poundsin hi pocket and you’ll do no harm. he’s a good fellow, isfarebroth, with as littl of the parson about him as will serv tocarri order.”“ho, ho! doctor,” said old mr. powderel, a retir iron-monger of somestand—hi interject be someth between a laugh and aparliamentari disapprov; “we must let you have your sai. but what wehav to consid is not anybodi’s incom—it’s the soul of the poorsick peopl”—here mr. powderel’s voic and face had a sincer pathosin them. “he is a real gospel preacher, is mr. tyke. i should voteagainst my conscienc if i vote against mr. tyke—i should inde.”“mr. tyke’s oppon have not ask ani on to vote against hisconsci, i believ,” said mr. hackbutt, a rich tanner of fluentspeech, whose glitter spectacl and erect hair were turn withsom sever toward innoc mr. powderel. “but in my judgment itbehov us, as director, to consid whether we will regard it as ourwhol busi to carri out proposit eman from a singlequart. will ani member of the committe aver that he would haveentertain the idea of displac the gentleman who ha alwaysdischarg the function of chaplain here, if it had not been suggestedto him by parti whose disposit it is to regard everi institutionof thi town as a machineri for carri out their own view? i tax noman’s motiv: let them lie between himself and a higher power; but ido sai, that there ar influenc at work here which ar incompatiblewith genuin independ, and that a crawl servil is usuallydict by circumst which gentlemen so conduct themselvescould not afford either moral or financi to avow. i myself am alayman, but i have given no inconsider attent to the divisionsin the church and—”“oh, damn the divis!” burst in mr. frank hawlei, lawyer andtown-clerk, who rare present himself at the board, but now lookedin hurriedli, whip in hand. “we have noth to do with them here.farebroth ha been do the work—what there wa—without pai, and ifpai is to be given, it should be given to him. i call it a confoundedjob to take the thing awai from farebroth.”“i think it would be as well for gentlemen not to give their remark aperson bear,” said mr. plymdal. “i shall vote for the appointmentof mr. tyke, but i should not have known, if mr. hackbutt hadn’t hintedit, that i wa a servil crawler.”“i disclaim ani person. i expressli said, if i mai be allow torepeat, or even to conclud what i wa about to sai—”“ah, here’s minchin!” said mr. frank hawlei; at which everybodi turnedawai from mr. hackbutt, leav him to feel the useless of superiorgift in middlemarch. “come, doctor, i must have you on the right side,eh?”“i hope so,” said dr. minchin, nod and shake hand here andther; “at whatev cost to my feel.”“if there’s ani feel here, it should be feel for the man who isturn out, i think,” said mr. frank hawlei.“i confess i have feel on the other side also. i have a dividedesteem,” said dr. minchin, rub hi hand. “i consid mr. tyke anexemplari man—none more so—and i believ him to be propos fromunimpeach motiv. i, for my part, wish that i could give him myvot. but i am constrain to take a view of the case which give thepreponder to mr. farebroth’s claim. he is an amiabl man, anabl preacher, and ha been longer among us.”old mr. powderel look on, sad and silent. mr. plymdal settl hiscravat, uneasili.“you don’t set up farebroth as a pattern of what a clergyman ought tobe, i hope,” said mr. larcher, the emin carrier, who had just comein. “i have no ill-will toward him, but i think we ow someth toth public, not to speak of anyth higher, in these appoint. inmi opinion farebroth is too lax for a clergyman. i don’t wish tobr up particular against him; but he will make a littl attendanceher go as far as he can.”“and a devilish deal better than too much,” said mr. hawlei, whose badlanguag wa notori in that part of the counti. “sick peopl can’tbear so much prai and preach. and that methodist sort ofreligion is bad for the spirit—bad for the insid, eh?” he ad,turn quickli round to the four medic men who were assembl.but ani answer wa dispens with by the entranc of three gentlemen,with whom there were greet more or less cordial. these were thereverend edward thesig, rector of st. peter’s, mr. bulstrod, and ourfriend mr. brook of tipton, who had late allow himself to be puton the board of director in hi turn, but had never befor attend,hi attend now be due to mr. bulstrod’s exert. lydgat wasth onli person still expect.everi on now sat down, mr. bulstrod presid, pale andself-restrain as usual. mr. thesig, a moder evangel, wishedfor the appoint of hi friend mr. tyke, a zealou abl man, who,offici at a chapel of eas, had not a cure of soul too extensiveto leav him ampl time for the new duti. it wa desir thatchaplainci of thi kind should be enter on with a ferventintent: thei were peculiar opportun for spiritu influenc;and while it wa good that a salari should be allot, there wa themor need for scrupul watch lest the offic should be pervertedinto a mere question of salari. mr. thesig’s manner had so much quietproprieti that objector could onli simmer in silenc.mr. brook believ that everybodi meant well in the matter. he had nothimself attend to the affair of the infirmari, though he had astrong interest in whatev wa for the benefit of middlemarch, and wasmost happi to meet the gentlemen present on ani public question—“anypubl question, you know,” mr. brook repeat, with hi nod ofperfect understand. “i am a good deal occupi as a magistr, andin the collect of documentari evid, but i regard my time asb at the dispos of the public—and, in short, my friend haveconvinc me that a chaplain with a salari—a salari, you know—is a verygood thing, and i am happi to be abl to come here and vote for theappoint of mr. tyke, who, i understand, is an unexception man,apostol and eloqu and everyth of that kind—and i am the lastman to withhold my vote—under the circumst, you know.”“it seem to me that you have been cram with on side of thequest, mr. brook,” said mr. frank hawlei, who wa afraid of nobodi,and wa a tori suspici of election intent. “you don’t seemto know that on of the worthiest men we have ha been do duti aschaplain here for year without pai, and that mr. tyke is propos tosupersed him.”“excus me, mr. hawlei,” said mr. bulstrod. “mr. brook ha been fullyinform of mr. farebroth’s charact and posit.”“by hi enemi,” flash out mr. hawlei.“i trust there is no person hostil concern here,” said mr.thesig.“i’ll swear there is, though,” retort mr. hawlei.“gentlemen,” said mr. bulstrod, in a subdu tone, “the merit of thequest mai be veri briefli state, and if ani on present doubt thateveri gentleman who is about to give hi vote ha not been fullyinform, i can now recapitul the consider that should weighon either side.”“i don’t see the good of that,” said mr. hawlei. “i suppos we all knowwhom we mean to vote for. ani man who want to do justic doe not waittil the last minut to hear both side of the question. i have no timeto lose, and i propos that the matter be put to the vote at onc.”a brief but still hot discuss follow befor each person wrote“tyke” or “farebroth” on a piec of paper and slip it into a glasstumbl; and in the mean time mr. bulstrod saw lydgat enter.“i perceiv that the vote ar equal divid at present,” said mr.bulstrod, in a clear bite voic. then, look up at lydgat—“there is a cast-vote still to be given. it is your, mr. lydgat:will you be good enough to write?”“the thing is settl now,” said mr. wrench, rise. “we all know howmr. lydgat will vote.”“you seem to speak with some peculiar mean, sir,” said lydgat,rather defiantli, and keep hi pencil suspend.“i mere mean that you ar expect to vote with mr. bulstrod. do youregard that mean as offens?”“it mai be offens to other. but i shall not desist from vote withhim on that account.” lydgat immedi wrote down “tyke.”so the rev. walter tyke becam chaplain to the infirmari, and lydgatecontinu to work with mr. bulstrod. he wa realli uncertain whethertyk were not the more suitabl candid, and yet hi consciousnesstold him that if he had been quit free from indirect bia he shouldhav vote for mr. farebroth. the affair of the chaplainci remain asor point in hi memori as a case in which thi petti medium ofmiddlemarch had been too strong for him. how could a man be satisfiedwith a decis between such altern and under such circumst?no more than he can be satisfi with hi hat, which he ha chosen fromamong such shape as the resourc of the ag offer him, wear it atbest with a resign which is chiefli support by comparison.but mr. farebroth met him with the same friendli as befor. thecharact of the publican and sinner is not alwai practicallyincompat with that of the modern pharise, for the major of usscarc see more distinctli the faulti of our own conduct than thefaulti of our own argument, or the dul of our own joke. butth vicar of st. botolph’s had certainli escap the slightest tinctureof the pharise, and by dint of admit to himself that he wa toomuch as other men were, he had becom remark unlik them inthi—that he could excus other for think slightli of him, andcould judg imparti of their conduct even when it told against him.“the world ha been too strong for _me_, i know,” he said on dai tolydg. “but then i am not a mighti man—i shall never be a man ofrenown. the choic of hercul is a pretti fabl; but prodicu make iteasi work for the hero, as if the first resolv were enough. anotherstori sai that he came to hold the distaff, and at last wore thenessu shirt. i suppos on good resolv might keep a man right ifeverybodi els’s resolv help him.”the vicar’s talk wa not alwai inspirit: he had escap be apharise, but he had not escap that low estim of possibilitieswhich we rather hastili arriv at as an infer from our own failur.lydgat thought that there wa a pitiabl infirm of will in mr.farebroth.chapter xix.“l’ altra vedet ch’ha fatto alla guanciadella sua palma, sospirando, letto.”—_purgatorio_, vii.when georg the fourth wa still reign over the privaci ofwindsor, when the duke of wellington wa prime minist, and mr. vincywa mayor of the old corpor in middlemarch, mr. casaubon, borndorothea brook, had taken her wed journei to rome. in those daysth world in gener wa more ignor of good and evil by forti yearsthan it is at present. travel did not often carri full informationon christian art either in their head or their pocket; and even themost brilliant english critic of the dai mistook the flower-flushedtomb of the ascend virgin for an ornament vase due to the painter’sfanci. romantic, which ha help to fill some dull blank with loveand knowledg, had not yet penetr the time with it leaven andent into everybodi’s food; it wa ferment still as adistinguish vigor enthusiasm in certain long-hair germanartist at rome, and the youth of other nation who work or idlednear them were sometim caught in the spread movement.on fine morn a young man whose hair wa not immoder long, butabund and curli, and who wa otherwis english in hi equip, hadjust turn hi back on the belveder torso in the vatican and waslook out on the magnific view of the mountain from the adjoininground vestibul. he wa suffici absorb not to notic theapproach of a dark-ei, anim german who came up to him and placinga hand on hi shoulder, said with a strong accent, “come here, quick!els she will have chang her pose.”quick wa readi at the call, and the two figur pass lightlyalong by the meleag, toward the hall where the reclin ariadn,then call the cleopatra, li in the marbl voluptu of herbeauti, the draperi fold around her with a petal-like eas andtend. thei were just in time to see anoth figur standingagainst a pedest near the reclin marbl: a breath bloominggirl, whose form, not shame by the ariadn, wa clad in quakerish graydraperi; her long cloak, fasten at the neck, wa thrown backward fromher arm, and on beauti unglov hand pillow her cheek, pushingsomewhat backward the white beaver bonnet which made a sort of halo toher face around the simpli braid dark-brown hair. she wa not lookingat the sculptur, probabl not think of it: her larg ey werefix dreamili on a streak of sunlight which fell across the floor. butsh becam consciou of the two stranger who suddenli paus as if tocontempl the cleopatra, and, without look at them, immediatelyturn awai to join a maid-servant and courier who were loiter alongth hall at a littl distanc off.“what do you think of that for a fine bit of antithesi?” said thegerman, search in hi friend’s face for respond admir, butgo on volubl without wait for ani other answer. “there liesantiqu beauti, not corps-like even in death, but arrest in thecomplet content of it sensuou perfect: and here stand beautyin it breath life, with the conscious of christian centuri init bosom. but she should be dress as a nun; i think she look almostwhat you call a quaker; i would dress her as a nun in my pictur.howev, she is marri; i saw her wed-ring on that wonder lefthand, otherwis i should have thought the sallow _geistlich_ wa herfath. i saw him part from her a good while ago, and just now ifound her in that magnific pose. onli think! he is perhap rich, andwould like to have her portrait taken. ah! it is no us look afterh—there she goe! let us follow her home!”“no, no,” said hi companion, with a littl frown.“you ar singular, ladislaw. you look struck togeth. do you knowher?”“i know that she is marri to my cousin,” said will ladislaw,saunter down the hall with a preoccupi air, while hi germanfriend kept at hi side and watch him eagerli.“what! the _geistlich_? he look more like an uncl—a more usefulsort of relat.”“he is not my uncl. i tell you he is my second cousin,” said ladislaw,with some irrit.“schön, schön. don’t be snappish. you ar not angri with me forthink mr. second-cousin the most perfect young madonna i ever saw?”“angri? nonsens. i have onli seen her onc befor, for a coupl ofminut, when my cousin introduc her to me, just befor i leftengland. thei were not marri then. i didn’t know thei were come torom.”“but you will go to see them now—you will find out what thei have foran address—sinc you know the name. shall we go to the post? and youcould speak about the portrait.”“confound you, naumann! i don’t know what i shall do. i am not sobrazen as you.”“bah! that is becaus you ar dilettantish and amateurish. if you werean artist, you would think of mistress second-cousin as antiqu formanim by christian sentiment—a sort of christian antigon—sensuousforc control by spiritu passion.”“ye, and that your paint her wa the chief outcom of herexist—the divin pass into higher complet and all butexhaust in the act of cover your bit of canva. i am amateurish ifyou like: i do _not_ think that all the univers is strain towardsth obscur signific of your pictur.”“but it is, my dear!—so far as it is strain through me, adolfnaumann: that stand firm,” said the good-natur painter, put ahand on ladislaw’s shoulder, and not in the least disturb by theunaccount touch of ill-humor in hi tone. “see now! my existencepresuppos the exist of the whole univers—doe it _not?_ and myfunct is to paint—and as a painter i have a concept which isaltogeth _genialisch_, of your great-aunt or second grandmoth as asubject for a pictur; therefor, the univers is strain towardsthat pictur through that particular hook or claw which it put forthin the shape of me—not true?”“but how if anoth claw in the shape of me is strain to thwartit?—the case is a littl less simpl then.”“not at all: the result of the struggl is the same thing—pictur or nopictur—logic.”will could not resist thi imperturb temper, and the cloud in hisfac broke into sunshini laughter.“come now, my friend—you will help?” said naumann, in a hope tone.“no; nonsens, naumann! english ladi ar not at everybodi’s servicea model. and you want to express too much with your paint. youwould onli have made a better or wors portrait with a background whicheveri connoisseur would give a differ reason for or against. andwhat is a portrait of a woman? your paint and plastik ar poor stuffaft all. thei perturb and dull concept instead of rais them.languag is a finer medium.”“ye, for those who can’t paint,” said naumann. “there you have perfectright. i did not recommend you to paint, my friend.”the amiabl artist carri hi sting, but ladislaw did not choos toappear stung. he went on as if he had not heard.“languag give a fuller imag, which is all the better for beingvagu. after all, the true see is within; and paint stare at youwith an insist imperfect. i feel that especi aboutrepresent of women. as if a woman were a mere coloredsuperfici! you must wait for movement and tone. there is a differencein their veri breath: thei chang from moment to moment.—thi womanwhom you have just seen, for exampl: how would you paint her voic,prai? but her voic is much divin than anyth you have seen ofher.”“i see, i see. you ar jealou. no man must presum to think that hecan paint your ideal. thi is seriou, my friend! your great-aunt! ‘derneff al onkel’ in a tragic sens—_ungeheu!_”“you and i shall quarrel, naumann, if you call that ladi my auntagain.”“how is she to be call then?”“mr. casaubon.”“good. suppos i get acquaint with her in spite of you, and find thatsh veri much wish to be paint?”“ye, suppos!” said will ladislaw, in a contemptu underton,intend to dismiss the subject. he wa consciou of be irrit byridicul small caus, which were half of hi own creation. why wash make ani fuss about mr. casaubon? and yet he felt as if somethinghad happen to him with regard to her. there ar charact which arecontinu creat collis and node for themselv in dramaswhich nobodi is prepar to act with them. their suscept willclash against object that remain innoc quiet.chapter xx.“a child forsaken, wake suddenli,whose gaze afeard on all thing round doth rove,and seeth onli that it cannot see the meet ey of love.”two hour later, dorothea wa seat in an inner room or boudoir of ahandsom apart in the via sistina.i am sorri to add that she wa sob bitterli, with such abandonmentto thi relief of an oppress heart as a woman habitu controlledbi pride on her own account and thought for other willsometim allow herself when she feel secur alon. and mr. casaubonwa certain to remain awai for some time at the vatican.yet dorothea had no distinctli shapen grievanc that she could stateeven to herself; and in the midst of her confus thought and passion,the mental act that wa struggl forth into clear wa aself-accus cry that her feel of desol wa the fault of herown spiritu poverti. she had marri the man of her choic, and withth advantag over most girl that she had contempl her marriagechiefli as the begin of new duti: from the veri first she hadthought of mr. casaubon as have a mind so much abov her own, that hemust often be claim by studi which she could not entir share;moreov, after the brief narrow experi of her girlhood she wasbehold rome, the citi of visibl histori, where the past of a wholehemispher seem move in funer process with strang ancestralimag and trophi gather from afar.but thi stupend fragmentari heighten the dreamlikestrang of her bridal life. dorothea had now been five week inrom, and in the kindli morn when autumn and winter seem to gohand in hand like a happi ag coupl on of whom would presentlysurv in chiller loneli, she had driven about at first with mr.casaubon, but of late chiefli with tantripp and their experiencedcouri. she had been led through the best galleri, had been taken toth chief point of view, had been shown the grandest ruin and themost gloriou church, and she had end by oftenest choos to driveout to the campagna where she could feel alon with the earth and sky,awai-from the oppress masquerad of ag, in which her own life tooseem to becom a masqu with enigmat costum.to those who have look at rome with the quicken power of aknowledg which breath a grow soul into all histor shape, andtrac out the suppress transit which unit all contrast, romemai still be the spiritu centr and interpret of the world. but letthem conceiv on more histor contrast: the gigant brokenrevel of that imperi and papal citi thrust abruptli on thenot of a girl who had been brought up in english and swisspuritan, fed on meagr protest histori and on art chiefli ofth hand-screen sort; a girl whose ardent natur turn all her smallallow of knowledg into principl, fuse her action into theirmould, and whose quick emot gave the most abstract thing thequal of a pleasur or a pain; a girl who had late becom a wife,and from the enthusiast accept of untri duti found herselfplung in tumultu preoccup with her person lot. the weightof unintellig rome might lie easili on bright nymph to whom itform a background for the brilliant picnic of anglo-foreign societi;but dorothea had no such defenc against deep impress. ruin andbasilica, palac and colossi, set in the midst of a sordid present,where all that wa live and warm-blood seem sunk in the deepdegeneraci of a superstit divorc from rever; the dimmer butyet eager titan life gaze and struggl on wall and ceil; thelong vista of white form whose marbl ey seem to hold themonoton light of an alien world: all thi vast wreck of ambitiousid, sensuou and spiritu, mix confusedli with the sign ofbreath forget and degrad, at first jar her as with anelectr shock, and then urg themselv on her with that achebelong to a glut of confus idea which check the flow of emot.form both pale and glow took possess of her young sens, andfix themselv in her memori even when she wa not think of them,prepar strang associ which remain through her after-year.our mood ar apt to bring with them imag which succe each otherlik the magic-lantern pictur of a doze; and in certain state ofdul forlorn dorothea all her life continu to see the vast ofst. peter’s, the huge bronz canopi, the excit intent in theattitud and garment of the prophet and evangelist in the mosaicsabov, and the red draperi which wa be hung for christma spreadingitself everywher like a diseas of the retina.not that thi inward amaz of dorothea’s wa anyth veryexcept: mani soul in their young nuditi ar tumbl out amongincongru and left to “find their feet” among them, while theireld go about their busi. nor can i suppos that when mr.casaubon is discov in a fit of weep six week after her wed,the situat will be regard as tragic. some discourag, somefaint of heart at the new real futur which replac the imaginari,is not unusu, and we do not expect peopl to be deepli move by whati not unusu. that element of tragedi which li in the veri fact offrequ, ha not yet wrought itself into the coars emot ofmankind; and perhap our frame could hardli bear much of it. if we hada keen vision and feel of all ordinari human life, it would be likehear the grass grow and the squirrel’s heart beat, and we should dieof that roar which li on the other side of silenc. as it is, thequickest of us walk about well wad with stupid.howev, dorothea wa cry, and if she had been requir to state thecaus, she could onli have done so in some such gener word as i havealreadi us: to have been driven to be more particular would have beenlik try to give a histori of the light and shadow, for that newreal futur which wa replac the imaginari drew it materi fromth endless minutia by which her view of mr. casaubon and her wifelyrel, now that she wa marri to him, wa gradual chang withth secret motion of a watch-hand from what it had been in her maidendream. it wa too earli yet for her fulli to recogn or at leastadmit the chang, still more for her to have readjust thatdevoted which wa so necessari a part of her mental life that shewa almost sure sooner or later to recov it. perman rebellion, thedisord of a life without some love rever resolv, wa notposs to her; but she wa now in an interv when the veri forc ofher natur heighten it confus. in thi wai, the earli month ofmarriag often ar time of critic tumult—whether that of ashrimp-pool or of deeper water—which afterward subsid into cheerfulpeac.but wa not mr. casaubon just as learn as befor? had hi form ofexpress chang, or hi sentiment becom less laudabl? ohwayward of womanhood! did hi chronolog fail him, or hi abilityto state not onli a theori but the name of those who held it; or hisprovis for give the head of ani subject on demand? and wa notrom the place in all the world to give free plai to suchaccomplish? besid, had not dorothea’s enthusiasm especiallydwelt on the prospect of reliev the weight and perhap the sadnesswith which great task lie on him who ha to achiev them?— and thatsuch weight press on mr. casaubon wa onli plainer than befor.all these ar crush question; but whatev els remain the same,the light had chang, and you cannot find the pearli dawn at noondai.the fact is unalter, that a fellow-mortal with whose natur you areacquaint sole through the brief entranc and exit of a fewimagin week call courtship, mai, when seen in the continu ofmarri companionship, be disclos as someth better or wors thanwhat you have preconceiv, but will certainli not appear altogetherth same. and it would be astonish to find how soon the chang isfelt if we had no kindr chang to compar with it. to share lodgingswith a brilliant dinner-companion, or to see your favorit politicianin the ministri, mai bring about chang quit as rapid: in these casestoo we begin by know littl and believ much, and we sometim endbi invert the quantiti.still, such comparison might mislead, for no man wa more incap offlashi make-believ than mr. casaubon: he wa as genuin a charact asani rumin anim, and he had not activ assist in creat anyillus about himself. how wa it that in the week sinc hermarriag, dorothea had not distinctli observ but felt with a stiflingdepress, that the larg vista and wide fresh air which she haddream of find in her husband’s mind were replac by anteroom andwind passag which seem to lead nowhith? i suppos it wa thatin courtship everyth is regard as provision and preliminari, andth smallest sampl of virtu or accomplish is taken to guaranteedelight store which the broad leisur of marriag will reveal. butth door-sill of marriag onc cross, expect is concentr onth present. have onc embark on your marit voyag, it isimposs not to be awar that you make no wai and that the sea is notwithin sight—that, in fact, you ar explor an enclos basin.in their convers befor marriag, mr. casaubon had often dwelt onsom explan or question detail of which dorothea did not seeth bear; but such imperfect coher seem due to the brokennessof their intercours, and, support by her faith in their futur, shehad listen with fervid patienc to a recit of possibl argumentsto be brought against mr. casaubon’s entir new view of thephilistin god dagon and other fish-deiti, think that hereaftersh should see thi subject which touch him so nearli from the samehigh ground whenc doubtless it had becom so import to him. again,the matter-of-cours statement and tone of dismiss with which hetreat what to her were the most stir thought, wa easilyaccount for as belong to the sens of hast and preoccup inwhich she herself share dure their engag. but now, sinc theyhad been in rome, with all the depth of her emot rous totumultu activ, and with life made a new problem by new element,she had been becom more and more awar, with a certain terror, thather mind wa continu slide into inward fit of anger andrepuls, or els into forlorn weari. how far the judici hookeror ani other hero of erudit would have been the same at mr.casaubon’s time of life, she had no mean of know, so that he couldnot have the advantag of comparison; but her husband’s wai ofcom on the strang impress object around them had begun toaffect her with a sort of mental shiver: he had perhap the bestintent of acquit himself worthili, but onli of acquittinghimself. what wa fresh to her mind wa worn out to hi; and suchcapac of thought and feel as had ever been stimul in him byth gener life of mankind had long shrunk to a sort of driedprepar, a lifeless embalm of knowledg.when he said, “doe thi interest you, dorothea? shall we stai a littlelong? i am readi to stai if you wish it,”—it seem to her as ifgo or stai were alik dreari. or, “should you like to go to thefarnesina, dorothea? it contain celebr fresco design or paintedbi raphael, which most person think it worth while to visit.”“but do you care about them?” wa alwai dorothea’s question.“thei ar, i believ, highli esteem. some of them repres the fableof cupid and psych, which is probabl the romant invent of aliterari period, and cannot, i think, be reckon as a genuin mythicalproduct. but if you like these wall-paint we can easili drivethith; and you will then, i think, have seen the chief work ofraphael, ani of which it were a piti to omit in a visit to rome. he isth painter who ha been held to combin the most complet grace ofform with sublim of express. such at least i have gather to beth opinion of cognoscenti.”thi kind of answer given in a measur offici tone, as of aclergyman read accord to the rubric, did not help to justifi theglori of the etern citi, or to give her the hope that if she knewmor about them the world would be joyous illumin for her. therei hardli ani contact more depress to a young ardent creatur thanthat of a mind in which year full of knowledg seem to have issu ina blank absenc of interest or sympathi.on other subject inde mr. casaubon show a tenac of occupationand an eager which ar usual regard as the effect ofenthusiasm, and dorothea wa anxiou to follow thi spontaneousdirect of hi thought, instead of be made to feel that shedrag him awai from it. but she wa gradual ceas to expect withher former delight confid that she should see ani wide openingwher she follow him. poor mr. casaubon himself wa lost among smallcloset and wind stair, and in an agit dim about thecabeiri, or in an exposur of other mythologist’ ill-consideredparallel, easili lost sight of ani purpos which had prompt him tothes labor. with hi taper stuck befor him he forgot the absenc ofwindow, and in bitter manuscript remark on other men’s notion aboutth solar deiti, he had becom indiffer to the sunlight.these characterist, fix and unchang as bone in mr. casaubon,might have remain longer unfelt by dorothea if she had beenencourag to pour forth her girlish and womanli feel—if he wouldhav held her hand between hi and listen with the delight oftend and understand to all the littl histori which made upher experi, and would have given her the same sort of intimaci inreturn, so that the past life of each could be includ in their mutualknowledg and affect—or if she could have fed her affect withthos childlik caress which ar the bent of everi sweet woman, whoha begun by shower kiss on the hard pate of her bald doll,creat a happi soul within that wooden from the wealth of her ownlov. that wa dorothea’s bent. with all her yearn to know what wasafar from her and to be wide benign, she had ardor enough for whatwa near, to have kiss mr. casaubon’s coat-sleev, or to havecaress hi shoe-latchet, if he would have made ani other sign ofaccept than pronounc her, with hi unfail proprieti, to be ofa most affection and truli feminin natur, indic at the sametim by polit reach a chair for her that he regard thesemanifest as rather crude and startl. have made hi clericaltoilet with due care in the morn, he wa prepar onli for thoseamen of life which were suit to the well-adjust stiff cravatof the period, and to a mind weight with unpublish matter.and by a sad contradict dorothea’s idea and resolv seem likemelt ic float and lost in the warm flood of which thei had beenbut anoth form. she wa humili to find herself a mere victim offeel, as if she could know noth except through that medium: allher strength wa scatter in fit of agit, of struggl, ofdespond, and then again in vision of more complet renunci,transform all hard condit into duti. poor dorothea! she wascertainli troublesom—to herself chiefli; but thi morn for thefirst time she had been troublesom to mr. casaubon.she had begun, while thei were take coffe, with a determin toshak off what she inwardli call her selfish, and turn a faceal cheer attent to her husband when he said, “my dear dorothea,we must now think of all that is yet left undon, as a preliminari toour departur. i would fain have return home earlier that we mighthav been at lowick for the christma; but my inquiri here have beenprotract beyond their anticip period. i trust, howev, that thetim here ha not been pass unpleasantli to you. among the sight ofeurop, that of rome ha ever been held on of the most strike and insom respect edifi. i well rememb that i consid it an epochin my life when i visit it for the first time; after the fall ofnapoleon, an event which open the contin to travel. inde ithink it is on among sever citi to which an extrem hyperbol hasbeen appli—‘see rome and die:’ but in your case i would propos anemend and sai, see rome as a bride, and live henceforth as a happywif.”mr. casaubon pronounc thi littl speech with the most conscientiousintent, blink a littl and swai hi head up and down, andconclud with a smile. he had not found marriag a raptur state,but he had no idea of be anyth els than an irreproachablehusband, who would make a charm young woman as happi as she deservedto be.“i hope you ar thoroughli satisfi with our stai—i mean, with theresult so far as your studi ar concern,” said dorothea, try tokeep her mind fix on what most affect her husband.“ye,” said mr. casaubon, with that peculiar pitch of voic which makesth word half a neg. “i have been led farther than i had foreseen,and variou subject for annot have present themselv which,though i have no direct need of them, i could not pretermit. the task,notwithstand the assist of my amanuensi, ha been a somewhatlabori on, but your societi ha happili prevent me from that toocontinu prosecut of thought beyond the hour of studi which hasbeen the snare of my solitari life.”“i am veri glad that my presenc ha made ani differ to you,” saiddorothea, who had a vivid memori of even in which she had supposedthat mr. casaubon’s mind had gone too deep dure the dai to be abl toget to the surfac again. i fear there wa a littl temper in herrepli. “i hope when we get to lowick, i shall be more us to you,and be abl to enter a littl more into what interest you.”“doubtless, my dear,” said mr. casaubon, with a slight bow. “the notesi have here made will want sift, and you can, if you pleas, extractthem under my direct.”“and all your note,” said dorothea, whose heart had alreadi burnedwithin her on thi subject, so that now she could not help speakingwith her tongu. “all those row of volum—will you not now do whatyou us to speak of?—will you not make up your mind what part of themyou will us, and begin to write the book which will make your vastknowledg us to the world? i will write to your dictat, or iwil copi and extract what you tell me: i can be of no other us.”dorothea, in a most unaccount, darkli feminin manner, end with aslight sob and ey full of tear.the excess feel manifest would alon have been highlydisturb to mr. casaubon, but there were other reason why dorothea’sword were among the most cut and irrit to him that she couldhav been impel to us. she wa as blind to hi inward troubl ash to her: she had not yet learn those hidden conflict in herhusband which claim our piti. she had not yet listen patient to hisheartbeat, but onli felt that her own wa beat violent. in mr.casaubon’s ear, dorothea’s voic gave loud emphat iter to thosemuffl suggest of conscious which it wa possibl to explaina mere fanci, the illus of exagger sensit: alwai whensuch suggest ar unmistak repeat from without, thei areresist as cruel and unjust. we ar anger even by the fullaccept of our humili confess—how much more by hear inhard distinct syllabl from the lip of a near observ, thoseconfus murmur which we try to call morbid, and strive against as ifthei were the oncom of numb! and thi cruel outward accus wasther in the shape of a wife—nai, of a young bride, who, instead ofobserv hi abund pen-scratch and amplitud of paper with theuncrit aw of an eleg-mind canari-bird, seem to presentherself as a spy watch everyth with a malign power of infer.here, toward thi particular point of the compass, mr. casaubon had asensit to match dorothea’s, and an equal quick to imaginemor than the fact. he had formerli observ with approb hercapac for worship the right object; he now foresaw with suddenterror that thi capac might be replac by presumpt, thisworship by the most exasper of all critic,—that which seesvagu a great mani fine end, and ha not the least notion what itcost to reach them.for the first time sinc dorothea had known him, mr. casaubon’s facehad a quick angri flush upon it.“my love,” he said, with irrit rein in by proprieti, “you mayr upon me for know the time and the season, adapt to thediffer stage of a work which is not to be measur by the facileconjectur of ignor onlook. it had been easi for me to gain atemporari effect by a mirag of baseless opinion; but it is ever thetrial of the scrupul explor to be salut with the impati scornof chatter who attempt onli the smallest achiev, be indeedequip for no other. and it were well if all such could be admonishedto discrimin judgment of which the true subject-matter liesentir beyond their reach, from those of which the element mai becompass by a narrow and superfici survei.”thi speech wa deliv with an energi and readi quit unusualwith mr. casaubon. it wa not inde entir an improvis, but hadtaken shape in inward colloqui, and rush out like the round grainsfrom a fruit when sudden heat crack it. dorothea wa not onli hiswif: she wa a personif of that shallow world which surroundsth appreci or despond author.dorothea wa indign in her turn. had she not been repressingeveryth in herself except the desir to enter into some fellowshipwith her husband’s chief interest?“my judgment _wa_ a veri superfici on—such as i am capabl ofform,” she answer, with a prompt resent, that need norehears. “you show me the row of notebook—you have often spokenof them—you have often said that thei want digest. but i neverheard you speak of the write that is to be publish. those were verysimpl fact, and my judgment went no farther. i onli beg you to letm be of some good to you.”dorothea rose to leav the tabl and mr. casaubon made no repli, takingup a letter which lai besid him as if to reperus it. both wereshock at their mutual situat—that each should have betrai angertoward the other. if thei had been at home, settl at lowick inordinari life among their neighbor, the clash would have been lessembarrass: but on a wed journei, the express object of which isto isol two peopl on the ground that thei ar all the world to eachoth, the sens of disagr is, to sai the least, confound andstultifi. to have chang your longitud extens and placedyourselv in a moral solitud in order to have small explos, tofind convers difficult and to hand a glass of water withoutlook, can hardli be regard as satisfactori fulfil even to thetoughest mind. to dorothea’s inexperienc sensit, it seemedlik a catastroph, chang all prospect; and to mr. casaubon it wasa new pain, he never have been on a wed journei befor, or foundhimself in that close union which wa more of a subject than he hadbeen abl to imagin, sinc thi charm young bride not onli obligedhim to much consider on her behalf (which he had sedulouslygiven), but turn out to be capabl of agit him cruelli justwher he most need sooth. instead of get a soft fenc againstth cold, shadowi, unapplaus audienc of hi life, had he onli givenit a more substanti presenc?neither of them felt it possibl to speak again at present. to haverevers a previou arrang and declin to go out would have beena show of persist anger which dorothea’s conscienc shrank from,see that she alreadi began to feel herself guilti. howev just herindign might be, her ideal wa not to claim justic, but to givetend. so when the carriag came to the door, she drove with mr.casaubon to the vatican, walk with him through the stoni avenu ofinscript, and when she part with him at the entranc to thelibrari, went on through the museum out of mere listless as to whatwa around her. she had not spirit to turn round and sai that she woulddriv anywher. it wa when mr. casaubon wa quit her that naumannhad first seen her, and he had enter the long galleri of sculptur atth same time with her; but here naumann had to await ladislaw withwhom he wa to settl a bet of champagn about an enigmaticalmediaev-look figur there. after thei had examin the figur, andhad walk on finish their disput, thei had part, ladislawling behind while naumann had gone into the hall of statu whereh again saw dorothea, and saw her in that brood abstract whichmad her pose remark. she did not realli see the streak of sunlighton the floor more than she saw the statu: she wa inwardli see thelight of year to come in her own home and over the english field andelm and hedg-border highroad; and feel that the wai in whichthei might be fill with joy devoted wa not so clear to her asit had been. but in dorothea’s mind there wa a current into which allthought and feel were apt sooner or later to flow—the reachingforward of the whole conscious toward the fullest truth, the leastparti good. there wa clearli someth better than anger anddespond.chapter xxi.“hire facound ek full womanli and plain,no contrefet term had sheto semen wise.”—chaucer.it wa in that wai dorothea came to be sob as soon as she wassecur alon. but she wa present rous by a knock at the door,which made her hastili dry her ey befor sai, “come in.” tantripphad brought a card, and said that there wa a gentleman wait in thelobbi. the courier had told him that onli mr. casaubon wa at home,but he said he wa a relat of mr. casaubon’s: would she see him?“ye,” said dorothea, without paus; “show him into the salon.” herchief impress about young ladislaw were that when she had seen himat lowick she had been made awar of mr. casaubon’s generos towardshim, and also that she had been interest in hi own hesit abouthi career. she wa aliv to anyth that gave her an opportun foract sympathi, and at thi moment it seem as if the visit had cometo shake her out of her self-absorb discont—to remind her of herhusband’s good, and make her feel that she had now the right to behi helpmat in all kind deed. she wait a minut or two, but whensh pass into the next room there were just sign enough that she hadbeen cry to make her open face look more youth and appeal thanusu. she met ladislaw with that exquisit smile of good-will which isunmix with vaniti, and held out her hand to him. he wa the elder bysever year, but at that moment he look much the younger, for histranspar complexion flush suddenli, and he spoke with a shynessextrem unlik the readi indiffer of hi manner with hi malecompanion, while dorothea becam all the calmer with a wonder desireto put him at eas.“i wa not awar that you and mr. casaubon were in rome, until thismorn, when i saw you in the vatican museum,” he said. “i knew you atonc—but—i mean, that i conclud mr. casaubon’s address would be foundat the post restant, and i wa anxiou to pai my respect to him andyou as earli as possibl.”“prai sit down. he is not here now, but he will be glad to hear of you,i am sure,” said dorothea, seat herself unthinkingli between thefir and the light of the tall window, and point to a chairopposit, with the quietud of a benign matron. the sign of girlishsorrow in her face were onli the more strike. “mr. casaubon is muchengag; but you will leav your address—will you not?—and he willwrit to you.”“you ar veri good,” said ladislaw, begin to lose hi diffid inth interest with which he wa observ the sign of weep which hadalt her face. “my address is on my card. but if you will allow me iwil call again to-morrow at an hour when mr. casaubon is like to beat home.”“he goe to read in the librari of the vatican everi dai, and you canhardli see him except by an appoint. especi now. we ar aboutto leav rome, and he is veri busi. he is usual awai almost frombreakfast till dinner. but i am sure he will wish you to dine with us.”will ladislaw wa struck mute for a few moment. he had never been fondof mr. casaubon, and if it had not been for the sens of oblig,would have laugh at him as a bat of erudit. but the idea of thisdri-up pedant, thi elabor of small explan about asimport as the surplu stock of fals antiqu kept in a vendor’sback chamber, have first got thi ador young creatur to marryhim, and then pass hi honeymoon awai from her, grope after hismouldi futil (will wa given to hyperbol)—thi sudden picturestir him with a sort of comic disgust: he wa divid between theimpuls to laugh aloud and the equal unseason impuls to burstinto scorn invect.for an instant he felt that the struggl wa caus a queer contortionof hi mobil featur, but with a good effort he resolv it intonoth more offens than a merri smile.dorothea wonder; but the smile wa irresist, and shone back fromher face too. will ladislaw’s smile wa delight, unless you wereangri with him beforehand: it wa a gush of inward light illuminatingth transpar skin as well as the ey, and plai about everi curveand line as if some ariel were touch them with a new charm, andbanish forev the trace of moodi. the reflect of that smilecould not but have a littl merriment in it too, even under darkeyelash still moist, as dorothea said inquiringli, “someth amusesy?”“ye,” said will, quick in find resourc. “i am think of thesort of figur i cut the first time i saw you, when you annihil mypoor sketch with your critic.”“my critic?” said dorothea, wonder still more. “sure not. ialwai feel particularli ignor about paint.”“i suspect you of know so much, that you knew how to sai just whatwa most cut. you said—i dare sai you don’t rememb it as ido—that the relat of my sketch to natur wa quit hidden from you.at least, you impli that.” will could laugh now as well as smile.“that wa realli my ignor,” said dorothea, admir will’sgood-humor. “i must have said so onli becaus i never could see anybeauti in the pictur which my uncl told me all judg thought veryfin. and i have gone about with just the same ignor in rome. therear compar few paint that i can realli enjoi. at first wheni enter a room where the wall ar cover with fresco, or with rarepictur, i feel a kind of aw—like a child present at great ceremonieswher there ar grand robe and process; i feel myself in thepres of some higher life than my own. but when i begin to examineth pictur on by on the life goe out of them, or els is somethingviol and strang to me. it must be my own dul. i am see somuch all at onc, and not understand half of it. that alwai makeson feel stupid. it is pain to be told that anyth is veri fineand not be abl to feel that it is fine—someth like be blind,while peopl talk of the sky.”“oh, there is a great deal in the feel for art which must beacquir,” said will. (it wa imposs now to doubt the direct ofdorothea’s confess.) “art is an old languag with a great manyartifici affect style, and sometim the chief pleasur on getsout of know them is the mere sens of know. i enjoi the art ofal sort here immens; but i suppos if i could pick my enjoy topiec i should find it made up of mani differ thread. there issometh in daub a littl on’s self, and have an idea of theprocess.”“you mean perhap to be a painter?” said dorothea, with a new directionof interest. “you mean to make paint your profess? mr. casaubonwil like to hear that you have chosen a profess.”“no, oh no,” said will, with some cold. “i have quit made up mymind against it. it is too on-side a life. i have been see a greatdeal of the german artist here: i travel from frankfort with on ofthem. some ar fine, even brilliant fellow—but i should not like toget into their wai of look at the world entir from the studiopoint of view.”“that i can understand,” said dorothea, cordial. “and in rome itseem as if there were so mani thing which ar more want in theworld than pictur. but if you have a geniu for paint, would itnot be right to take that as a guid? perhap you might do betterth than these—or differ, so that there might not be so manypictur almost all alik in the same place.”there wa no mistak thi simplic, and will wa won by it intofrank. “a man must have a veri rare geniu to make chang of thatsort. i am afraid mine would not carri me even to the pitch of doingwel what ha been done alreadi, at least not so well as to make itworth while. and i should never succe in anyth by dint ofdrudgeri. if thing don’t come easili to me i never get them.”“i have heard mr. casaubon sai that he regret your want of patienc,”said dorothea, gentli. she wa rather shock at thi mode of takingal life as a holidai.“ye, i know mr. casaubon’s opinion. he and i differ.”the slight streak of contempt in thi hasti repli offend dorothea.she wa all the more suscept about mr. casaubon becaus of hermorn’s troubl.“certainli you differ,” she said, rather proudli. “i did not think ofcompar you: such power of persev devot labor as mr.casaubon’s is not common.”will saw that she wa offend, but thi onli gave an additionalimpuls to the new irrit of hi latent dislik toward mr.casaubon. it wa too intoler that dorothea should be worshippingthi husband: such weak in a woman is pleasant to no man but thehusband in question. mortal ar easili tempt to pinch the life outof their neighbor’s buzz glori, and think that such kill is nomurd.“no, inde,” he answer, promptli. “and therefor it is a piti thatit should be thrown awai, as so much english scholarship is, for wantof know what is be done by the rest of the world. if mr. casaubonread german he would save himself a great deal of troubl.”“i do not understand you,” said dorothea, startl and anxiou.“i mere mean,” said will, in an offhand wai, “that the german havetaken the lead in histor inquiri, and thei laugh at result whichar got by grope about in wood with a pocket-compass while thei havemad good road. when i wa with mr. casaubon i saw that he deafenedhimself in that direct: it wa almost against hi will that he reada latin treatis written by a german. i wa veri sorri.”will onli thought of give a good pinch that would annihil thatvaunt labori, and wa unabl to imagin the mode in whichdorothea would be wound. young mr. ladislaw wa not at all deephimself in german writer; but veri littl achiev is requir inord to piti anoth man’s shortcom.poor dorothea felt a pang at the thought that the labor of herhusband’s life might be void, which left her no energi to spare for thequest whether thi young rel who wa so much oblig to himought not to have repress hi observ. she did not even speak,but sat look at her hand, absorb in the piteous of thatthought.will, howev, have given that annihil pinch, wa ratherasham, imagin from dorothea’s silenc that he had offend herstil more; and have also a conscienc about pluck thetail-feather from a benefactor.“i regret it especi,” he resum, take the usual cours fromdetract to insincer eulogi, “becaus of my gratitud and respecttoward my cousin. it would not signifi so much in a man whose talentsand charact were less distinguish.”dorothea rais her ey, brighter than usual with excit feel, andsaid in her saddest recit, “how i wish i had learn german when iwa at lausann! there were plenti of german teacher. but now i can beof no us.”there wa a new light, but still a mysteri light, for will indorothea’s last word. the question how she had come to accept mr.casaubon—which he had dismiss when he first saw her by sai thatsh must be disagre in spite of appear—wa not now to beanswer on ani such short and easi method. whatev els she might be,she wa not disagre. she wa not coldli clever and indirectlysatir, but ador simpl and full of feel. she wa an angelbeguil. it would be a uniqu delight to wait and watch for themelodi fragment in which her heart and soul came forth so directlyand ingenu. the aeolian harp again came into hi mind.she must have made some origin romanc for herself in thi marriag.and if mr. casaubon had been a dragon who had carri her off to hislair with hi talon simpli and without legal form, it would have beenan unavoid feat of heroism to releas her and fall at her feet. buth wa someth more unmanag than a dragon: he wa a benefactorwith collect societi at hi back, and he wa at that moment enteringth room in all the unimpeach correct of hi demeanor, whiledorothea wa look anim with a newli rous alarm and regret, andwil wa look anim with hi admir specul about herfeel.mr. casaubon felt a surpris which wa quit unmix with pleasur, buth did not swerv from hi usual polit of greet, when will roseand explain hi presenc. mr. casaubon wa less happi than usual, andthi perhap made him look all the dimmer and more fade; els, theeffect might easili have been produc by the contrast of hi youngcousin’s appear. the first impress on see will wa on ofsunni bright, which ad to the uncertainti of hi changingexpress. sure, hi veri featur chang their form, hi jawlook sometim larg and sometim small; and the littl rippl inhi nose wa a prepar for metamorphosi. when he turn hi headquickli hi hair seem to shake out light, and some person thoughtthei saw decid geniu in thi corusc. mr. casaubon, on thecontrari, stood rayless.as dorothea’s ey were turn anxious on her husband she wa perhapsnot insens to the contrast, but it wa onli mingl with othercaus in make her more consciou of that new alarm on hi behalfwhich wa the first stir of a piti tender fed by thereal of hi lot and not by her own dream. yet it wa a sourc ofgreat freedom to her that will wa there; hi young equal wasagre, and also perhap hi open to convict. she felt animmens need of some on to speak to, and she had never befor seen anyon who seem so quick and pliabl, so like to understandeveryth.mr. casaubon grave hope that will wa pass hi time profit aswel as pleasantli in rome—had thought hi intent wa to remain insouth germani—but beg him to come and dine to-morrow, when he couldconvers more at larg: at present he wa somewhat weari. ladislawunderstood, and accept the invit immedi took hi leav.dorothea’s ey follow her husband anxious, while he sank downwearili at the end of a sofa, and rest hi elbow support hi headand look on the floor. a littl flush, and with bright ey, sheseat herself besid him, and said—“forgiv me for speak so hastili to you thi morn. i wa wrong. ifear i hurt you and made the dai more burdensom.”“i am glad that you feel that, my dear,” said mr. casaubon. he spokequietli and bow hi head a littl, but there wa still an uneasyfeel in hi ey as he look at her.“but you do forgiv me?” said dorothea, with a quick sob. in her needfor some manifest of feel she wa readi to exagger her ownfault. would not love see return penit afar off, and fall on itsneck and kiss it?“my dear dorothea—‘who with repent is not satisfi, is not ofheaven nor earth:’—you do not think me worthi to be banish by thatsever sentenc,” said mr. casaubon, exert himself to make a strongstat, and also to smile faintli.dorothea wa silent, but a tear which had come up with the sob wouldinsist on fall.“you ar excit, my dear. and i also am feel some unpleasantconsequ of too much mental disturb,” said mr. casaubon. infact, he had it in hi thought to tell her that she ought not to havereceiv young ladislaw in hi absenc: but he abstain, partli fromth sens that it would be ungraci to bring a new complaint in themoment of her penit acknowledg, partli becaus he want toavoid further agit of himself by speech, and partli becaus he wastoo proud to betrai that jealousi of disposit which wa not soexhaust on hi scholarli compeer that there wa none to spare inoth direct. there is a sort of jealousi which need veri littlefir: it is hardli a passion, but a blight bred in the cloudi, dampdespond of uneasi egoism.“i think it is time for us to dress,” he ad, look at hi watch.thei both rose, and there wa never ani further allus between themto what had pass on thi dai.but dorothea rememb it to the last with the vivid with which weall rememb epoch in our experi when some dear expect di,or some new motiv is born. todai she had begun to see that she hadbeen under a wild illus in expect a respons to her feel frommr. casaubon, and she had felt the wake of a presenti that theremight be a sad conscious in hi life which made as great a need onhi side as on her own.we ar all of us born in moral stupid, take the world as an udderto feed our suprem selv: dorothea had earli begun to emerg fromthat stupid, but yet it had been easier to her to imagin how shewould devot herself to mr. casaubon, and becom wise and strong in hisstrength and wisdom, than to conceiv with that distinct which isno longer reflect but feel—an idea wrought back to the directnessof sens, like the solid of object—that he had an equival centreof self, whenc the light and shadow must alwai fall with a certaindiffer.chapter xxii.“nou câusam longtemp; ell était simpl et bonn.ne sachant pa le mal, ell faisait le bien;de richess du coeur ell me fit l’aumôn,et tout en écoutant comm le coeur se donn,san oser y penser je lui donnai le mien;ell emporta ma vie, et n’en sut jamai rien.”—alfr de musset.will ladislaw wa delightfulli agreeabl at dinner the next dai, andgav no opportun for mr. casaubon to show disapprob. on thecontrari it seem to dorothea that will had a happier wai of drawingh husband into convers and of deferenti listen to himthan she had ever observ in ani on befor. to be sure, the listenersabout tipton were not highli gift! will talk a good deal himself,but what he said wa thrown in with such rapid, and with such anunimport air of sai someth by the wai, that it seem a gaylittl chime after the great bell. if will wa not alwai perfect, thiswa certainli on of hi good dai. he describ touch of incidentamong the poor peopl in rome, onli to be seen by on who could moveabout freeli; he found himself in agreement with mr. casaubon as to theunsound opinion of middleton concern the relat of judaism andcatholic; and pass easili to a half-enthusiast half-playfulpictur of the enjoy he got out of the veri miscellan ofrom, which made the mind flexibl with constant comparison, and savedy from see the world’s ag as a set of box-like partitionswithout vital connect. mr. casaubon’s studi, will observ, hadalwai been of too broad a kind for that, and he had perhap never feltani such sudden effect, but for himself he confess that rome hadgiven him quit a new sens of histori as a whole: the fragmentsstimul hi imagin and made him construct. thenoccasion, but not too often, he appeal to dorothea, and discussedwhat she said, as if her sentiment were an item to be consid in thefin judgment even of the madonna di foligno or the laocoon. a senseof contribut to form the world’s opinion make conversationparticularli cheer; and mr. casaubon too wa not without hi pridein hi young wife, who spoke better than most women, as inde he hadperceiv in choos her.sinc thing were go on so pleasantli, mr. casaubon’s statement thathi labor in the librari would be suspend for a coupl of dai, andthat after a brief renew he should have no further reason for stayingin rome, encourag will to urg that mr. casaubon should not go awaywithout see a studio or two. would not mr. casaubon take her? thatsort of thing ought not to be miss: it wa quit special: it wa aform of life that grew like a small fresh veget with itspopul of insect on huge fossil. will would be happi to conductthem—not to anyth wearisom, onli to a few exampl.mr. casaubon, see dorothea look earnestli toward him, could not butask her if she would be interest in such visit: he wa now at herservic dure the whole dai; and it wa agre that will should comeon the morrow and drive with them.will could not omit thorwaldsen, a live celebr about whom even mr.casaubon inquir, but befor the dai wa far advanc he led the wayto the studio of hi friend adolf naumann, whom he mention as on ofth chief renov of christian art, on of those who had not onlyreviv but expand that grand concept of suprem event asmysteri at which the success ag were spectat, and in relationto which the great soul of all period becam as it werecontemporari. will ad that he had made himself naumann’s pupil forth nonc.“i have been make some oil-sketch under him,” said will. “i hatecopi. i must put someth of my own in. naumann ha been paintingth saint draw the car of the church, and i have been make asketch of marlow’s tamburlain drive the conquer king in hischariot. i am not so ecclesiast as naumann, and i sometim twithim with hi excess of mean. but thi time i mean to outdo him inbreadth of intent. i take tamburlain in hi chariot for thetremend cours of the world’s physic histori lash on thehar dynasti. in my opinion, that is a good mythicalinterpret.” will here look at mr. casaubon, who receiv thisoffhand treatment of symbol veri uneasili, and bow with a neutralair.“the sketch must be veri grand, if it convei so much,” said dorothea.“i should need some explan even of the mean you give. do youintend tamburlain to repres earthquak and volcano?”“oh ye,” said will, laugh, “and migrat of race and clearingsof forest—and america and the steam-engin. everyth you canimagin!”“what a difficult kind of shorthand!” said dorothea, smile towardsh husband. “it would requir all your knowledg to be abl to readit.”mr. casaubon blink furtiv at will. he had a suspicion that he wasb laugh at. but it wa not possibl to includ dorothea in thesuspicion.thei found naumann paint industri, but no model wa present;hi pictur were advantag arrang, and hi own plain vivaciousperson set off by a dove-color blous and a maroon velvet cap, sothat everyth wa as fortun as if he had expect the beautifulyoung english ladi exactli at that time.the painter in hi confid english gave littl dissert on hisfinish and unfinish subject, seem to observ mr. casaubon asmuch as he did dorothea. will burst in here and there with ardent wordsof prais, mark out particular merit in hi friend’s work; anddorothea felt that she wa get quit new notion as to thesignific of madonna seat under inexplic canopi throneswith the simpl countri as a background, and of saint witharchitectur model in their hand, or knive accident wedg intheir skull. some thing which had seem monstrou to her weregath intellig and even a natur mean: but all thi wasappar a branch of knowledg in which mr. casaubon had notinterest himself.“i think i would rather feel that paint is beauti than have toread it as an enigma; but i should learn to understand these picturessoon than your with the veri wide mean,” said dorothea, speakingto will.“don’t speak of my paint befor naumann,” said will. “he will tellyou, it is all _pfuscherei_, which is hi most opprobri word!”“is that true?” said dorothea, turn her sincer ey on naumann, whomad a slight grimac and said—“oh, he doe not mean it serious with paint. hi walk must be_bell-lettr_. that is wi-id.”naumann’s pronunci of the vowel seem to stretch the wordsatir. will did not half like it, but manag to laugh: and mr.casaubon, while he felt some disgust at the artist’s german accent,began to entertain a littl respect for hi judici sever.the respect wa not diminish when naumann, after draw will asidefor a moment and look, first at a larg canva, then at mr.casaubon, came forward again and said—“my friend ladislaw think you will pardon me, sir, if i sai that asketch of your head would be invalu to me for the st. thomasaquina in my pictur there. it is too much to ask; but i so seldom seejust what i want—the idealist in the real.”“you astonish me greatli, sir,” said mr. casaubon, hi look improvedwith a glow of delight; “but if my poor physiognomi, which i have beenaccustom to regard as of the commonest order, can be of ani us toyou in furnish some trait for the angel doctor, i shall feelhonor. that is to sai, if the oper will not be a lengthi on;and if mr. casaubon will not object to the delai.”as for dorothea, noth could have pleas her more, unless it hadbeen a miracul voic pronounc mr. casaubon the wisest andworthiest among the son of men. in that case her totter faith wouldhav becom firm again.naumann’s apparatu wa at hand in wonder complet, and thesketch went on at onc as well as the convers. dorothea sat downand subsid into calm silenc, feel happier than she had done for along while befor. everi on about her seem good, and she said toherself that rome, if she had onli been less ignor, would have beenful of beauti: it sad would have been wing with hope. no naturecould be less suspici than her: when she wa a child she believedin the gratitud of wasp and the honor suscept of sparrow,and wa proportion indign when their base wa mademanifest.the adroit artist wa ask mr. casaubon question about englishpol, which brought long answer, and, will meanwhil had perchedhimself on some step in the background overlook all.present naumann said—“now if i could lai thi by for half an hour andtak it up again—come and look, ladislaw—i think it is perfect so far.”will vent those adjur interject which impli that admir istoo strong for syntax; and naumann said in a tone of piteou regret—“ah—now—if i could but have had more—but you have other engag—icould not ask it—or even to come again to-morrow.”“oh, let us stai!” said dorothea. “we have noth to do to-dai exceptgo about, have we?” she ad, look entreatingli at mr. casaubon.“it would be a piti not to make the head as good as possibl.”“i am at your servic, sir, in the matter,” said mr. casaubon, withpolit condescens. “have given up the interior of my head toidl, it is as well that the exterior should work in thi wai.”“you ar unspeak good—now i am happi!” said naumann, and then wenton in german to will, point here and there to the sketch as if hewer consid that. put it asid for a moment, he look roundvagu, as if seek some occup for hi visitor, and afterwardsturn to mr. casaubon, said—“perhap the beauti bride, the graciou ladi, would not be unwillingto let me fill up the time by try to make a slight sketch ofher—not, of cours, as you see, for that pictur—onli as a singlestudi.”mr. casaubon, bow, doubt not that mr. casaubon would oblig him,and dorothea said, at onc, “where shall i put myself?”naumann wa all apolog in ask her to stand, and allow him toadjust her attitud, to which she submit without ani of the affectedair and laugh frequent thought necessari on such occas, whenth painter said, “it is as santa clara that i want you tostand—lean so, with your cheek against your hand—so—look at thatstool, pleas, so!”will wa divid between the inclin to fall at the saint’s feetand kiss her robe, and the temptat to knock naumann down while hewa adjust her arm. all thi wa impud and desecr, and herep that he had brought her.the artist wa dilig, and will recov himself move about andoccupi mr. casaubon as ingeni as he could; but he did not in theend prevent the time from seem long to that gentleman, as wa clearfrom hi express a fear that mr. casaubon would be tire. naumanntook the hint and said—“now, sir, if you can oblig me again; i will releas the ladi-wife.”so mr. casaubon’s patienc held out further, and when after all itturn out that the head of saint thoma aquina would be more perfectif anoth sit could be had, it wa grant for the morrow. on themorrow santa clara too wa retouch more than onc. the result of allwa so far from displeas to mr. casaubon, that he arrang for thepurchas of the pictur in which saint thoma aquina sat among thedoctor of the church in a disput too abstract to be repres,but listen to with more or less attent by an audienc abov. thesanta clara, which wa spoken of in the second place, naumann declaredhimself to be dissatisfi with—he could not, in conscienc, engag tomak a worthi pictur of it; so about the santa clara the arrangementwa condit.i will not dwell on naumann’s joke at the expens of mr. casaubon thateven, or on hi dithyramb about dorothea’s charm, in all which willjoin, but with a differ. no sooner did naumann mention ani detailof dorothea’s beauti, than will got exasper at hi presumpt:there wa gross in hi choic of the most ordinari word, and whatbusi had he to talk of her lip? she wa not a woman to be spokenof as other women were. will could not sai just what he thought, but hebecam irrit. and yet, when after some resist he had consentedto take the casaubon to hi friend’s studio, he had been allur byth gratif of hi pride in be the person who could grantnaumann such an opportun of studi her loveli—or rather herdivin, for the ordinari phrase which might appli to mere bodilypretti were not applic to her. (certainli all tipton and itsneighborhood, as well as dorothea herself, would have been surpris ather beauti be made so much of. in that part of the world miss brookehad been onli a “fine young woman.”)“oblig me by let the subject drop, naumann. mr. casaubon is notto be talk of as if she were a model,” said will. naumann stare athim.“schön! i will talk of my aquina. the head is not a bad type, afteral. i dare sai the great scholast himself would have been flatteredto have hi portrait ask for. noth like these starchi doctor forvan! it wa as i thought: he care much less for her portrait thanhi own.”“he’s a curs white-blood pedant coxcomb,” said will, withgnash impetuos. hi oblig to mr. casaubon were not known tohi hearer, but will himself wa think of them, and wish that hecould discharg them all by a check.naumann gave a shrug and said, “it is good thei go awai soon, my dear.thei ar spoil your fine temper.”all will’s hope and contriv were now concentr on seeingdorothea when she wa alon. he onli want her to take more emphaticnotic of him; he onli want to be someth more special in herremembr than he could yet believ himself like to be. he wasrath impati under that open ardent good-will, which he saw wa herusu state of feel. the remot worship of a woman throne out oftheir reach plai a great part in men’s live, but in most case theworshipp long for some queenli recognit, some approv sign bywhich hi soul’s sovereign mai cheer him without descend from herhigh place. that wa precis what will want. but there were plentyof contradict in hi imagin demand. it wa beauti to seehow dorothea’s ey turn with wife anxieti and beseech to mr.casaubon: she would have lost some of her halo if she had been withoutthat duteou preoccup; and yet at the next moment the husband’ssandi absorpt of such nectar wa too intoler; and will’s longingto sai damag thing about him wa perhap not the less tormentingbecaus he felt the strongest reason for restrain it.will had not been invit to dine the next dai. henc he persuadedhimself that he wa bound to call, and that the onli elig time wasth middl of the dai, when mr. casaubon would not be at home.dorothea, who had not been made awar that her former recept of willhad displeas her husband, had no hesit about see him,especi as he might be come to pai a farewel visit. when he enteredsh wa look at some cameo which she had been bui for celia. shegreet will as if hi visit were quit a matter of cours, and said atonc, have a cameo bracelet in her hand—“i am so glad you ar come. perhap you understand all about cameo,and can tell me if these ar realli good. i wish to have you with usin choos them, but mr. casaubon object: he thought there wa nottim. he will finish hi work to-morrow, and we shall go awai in threedai. i have been uneasi about these cameo. prai sit down and look atthem.”“i am not particularli know, but there can be no great mistak aboutthes littl homer bit: thei ar exquisit neat. and the color isfin: it will just suit you.”“oh, thei ar for my sister, who ha quit a differ complexion. yousaw her with me at lowick: she is light-hair and veri pretti—at leasti think so. we were never so long awai from each other in our livesbefor. she is a great pet and never wa naughti in her life. i foundout befor i came awai that she want me to bui her some cameo, and ishould be sorri for them not to be good—after their kind.” dorotheaad the last word with a smile.“you seem not to care about cameo,” said will, seat himself at somedist from her, and observ her while she close the case.“no, frankli, i don’t think them a great object in life,” saiddorothea.“i fear you ar a heret about art gener. how is that? i shouldhav expect you to be veri sensit to the beauti everywher.”“i suppos i am dull about mani thing,” said dorothea, simpli. “ishould like to make life beauti—i mean everybodi’s life. and thenal thi immens expens of art, that seem somehow to lie outsid lifeand make it no better for the world, pain on. it spoil my enjoymentof anyth when i am made to think that most peopl ar shut out fromit.”“i call that the fanatic of sympathi,” said will, impetu. “youmight sai the same of landscap, of poetri, of all refin. if youcarri it out you ought to be miser in your own good, and turnevil that you might have no advantag over other. the best pieti is toenjoi—when you can. you ar do the most then to save the earth’scharact as an agreeabl planet. and enjoy radiat. it is of nous to try and take care of all the world; that is be taken care ofwhen you feel delight—in art or in anyth els. would you turn allth youth of the world into a tragic choru, wail and moralizingov miseri? i suspect that you have some fals belief in the virtuesof miseri, and want to make your life a martyrdom.” will had gonefurth than he intend, and check himself. but dorothea’s thoughtwa not take just the same direct as hi own, and she answeredwithout ani special emot—“inde you mistak me. i am not a sad, melancholi creatur. i am neverunhappi long togeth. i am angri and naughti—not like celia: i have agreat outburst, and then all seem gloriou again. i cannot helpbeliev in gloriou thing in a blind sort of wai. i should be quitewil to enjoi the art here, but there is so much that i don’t knowth reason of—so much that seem to me a consecr of uglinessrath than beauti. the paint and sculptur mai be wonder, butth feel is often low and brutal, and sometim even ridicul.here and there i see what take me at onc as nobl—someth that imight compar with the alban mountain or the sunset from the pincianhil; but that make it the greater piti that there is so littl of thebest kind among all that mass of thing over which men have toil so.”“of cours there is alwai a great deal of poor work: the rarer thingswant that soil to grow in.”“oh dear,” said dorothea, take up that thought into the chief currentof her anxieti; “i see it must be veri difficult to do anyth good. ihav often felt sinc i have been in rome that most of our live wouldlook much uglier and more bungl than the pictur, if thei could beput on the wall.”dorothea part her lip again as if she were go to sai more, butchang her mind and paus.“you ar too young—it is an anachron for you to have such thought,”said will, energet, with a quick shake of the head habitu tohim. “you talk as if you had never known ani youth. it is monstrou—asif you had had a vision of hade in your childhood, like the boi in thelegend. you have been brought up in some of those horribl notion thatchoos the sweetest women to devour—like minotaur. and now you will goand be shut up in that stone prison at lowick: you will be buriedal. it make me savag to think of it! i would rather never haveseen you than think of you with such a prospect.”will again fear that he had gone too far; but the mean we attachto word depend on our feel, and hi tone of angri regret had somuch kind in it for dorothea’s heart, which had alwai been givingout ardor and had never been fed with much from the live beingsaround her, that she felt a new sens of gratitud and answer with agentl smile—“it is veri good of you to be anxiou about me. it is becaus you didnot like lowick yourself: you had set your heart on anoth kind oflif. but lowick is my chosen home.”the last sentenc wa spoken with an almost solemn cadenc, and willdid not know what to sai, sinc it would not be us for him toembrac her slipper, and tell her that he would die for her: it wasclear that she requir noth of the sort; and thei were both silentfor a moment or two, when dorothea began again with an air of sai atlast what had been in her mind beforehand.“i want to ask you again about someth you said the other dai.perhap it wa half of it your live wai of speak: i notic thatyou like to put thing strongli; i myself often exagger when i speakhastili.”“what wa it?” said will, observ that she spoke with a timidityquit new in her. “i have a hyperbol tongu: it catch fire as itgo. i dare sai i shall have to retract.”“i mean what you said about the necess of know german—i mean, forth subject that mr. casaubon is engag in. i have been thinkingabout it; and it seem to me that with mr. casaubon’s learn he musthav befor him the same materi as german scholar—ha he not?”dorothea’s timid wa due to an indistinct conscious that she wasin the strang situat of consult a third person about theadequaci of mr. casaubon’s learn.“not exactli the same materi,” said will, think that he would beduli reserv. “he is not an orientalist, you know. he doe not professto have more than second-hand knowledg there.”“but there ar veri valuabl book about antiqu which were writtena long while ago by scholar who knew noth about these modernth; and thei ar still us. why should mr. casaubon’s not bevalu, like their?” said dorothea, with more remonstr energi.she wa impel to have the argument aloud, which she had been havingin her own mind.“that depend on the line of studi taken,” said will, also get aton of rejoind. “the subject mr. casaubon ha chosen is as changinga chemistri: new discoveri ar constantli make new point of view.who want a system on the basi of the four element, or a book torefut paracelsu? do you not see that it is no us now to be crawlinga littl wai after men of the last centuri—men like bryant—andcorrect their mistak?—live in a lumber-room and furbish upbroken-leg theori about chu and mizraim?”“how can you bear to speak so lightli?” said dorothea, with a lookbetween sorrow and anger. “if it were as you sai, what could be sadderthan so much ardent labor all in vain? i wonder it doe not affect youmor painfulli, if you realli think that a man like mr. casaubon, of somuch good, power, and learn, should in ani wai fail in what hasbeen the labor of hi best year.” she wa begin to be shock thatsh had got to such a point of supposit, and indign with will forhav led her to it.“you question me about the matter of fact, not of feel,” saidwil. “but if you wish to punish me for the fact, i submit. i am not ina posit to express my feel toward mr. casaubon: it would be atbest a pension’s eulogi.”“prai excus me,” said dorothea, color deepli. “i am awar, as yousai, that i am in fault in have introduc the subject. inde, i amwrong altogeth. failur after long persever is much grander thannev to have a strive good enough to be call a failur.”“i quit agre with you,” said will, determin to chang thesitu—“so much so that i have made up my mind not to run that riskof never attain a failur. mr. casaubon’s generos ha perhapsbeen danger to me, and i mean to renounc the liberti it ha givenm. i mean to go back to england shortli and work my own wai—depend onnobodi els than myself.”“that is fine—i respect that feel,” said dorothea, with returningkind. “but mr. casaubon, i am sure, ha never thought of anythingin the matter except what wa most for your welfar.”“she ha obstinaci and pride enough to serv instead of love, now sheha marri him,” said will to himself. aloud he said, rise—“i shall not see you again.”“oh, stai till mr. casaubon come,” said dorothea, earnestli. “i am soglad we met in rome. i want to know you.”“and i have made you angri,” said will. “i have made you think ill ofm.”“oh no. my sister tell me i am alwai angri with peopl who do not sayjust what i like. but i hope i am not given to think ill of them. inth end i am usual oblig to think ill of myself for be soimpati.”“still, you don’t like me; i have made myself an unpleas thought toyou.”“not at all,” said dorothea, with the most open kind. “i like youveri much.”will wa not quit content, think that he would appar havebeen of more import if he had been dislik. he said noth, butlook dull, not to sai sulki.“and i am quit interest to see what you will do,” dorothea went oncheerfulli. “i believ devoutli in a natur differ of vocat. ifit were not for that belief, i suppos i should be veri narrow—therear so mani thing, besid paint, that i am quit ignor of. youwould hardli believ how littl i have taken in of music andliteratur, which you know so much of. i wonder what your vocat willturn out to be: perhap you will be a poet?”“that depend. to be a poet is to have a soul so quick to discern thatno shade of qualiti escap it, and so quick to feel, that discernmenti but a hand plai with fine order varieti on the chord ofemot—a soul in which knowledg pass instantan into feel,and feel flash back as a new organ of knowledg. on mai have thatcondit by fit onli.”“but you leav out the poem,” said dorothea. “i think thei ar wantedto complet the poet. i understand what you mean about knowledgepass into feel, for that seem to be just what i experi. buti am sure i could never produc a poem.”“you _ar_ a poem—and that is to be the best part of a poet—what makesup the poet’s conscious in hi best mood,” said will, show suchorigin as we all share with the morn and the spring-time andoth endless renew.“i am veri glad to hear it,” said dorothea, laugh out her word in abird-like modul, and look at will with play gratitud in herey. “what veri kind thing you sai to me!”“i wish i could ever do anyth that would be what you call kind—thati could ever be of the slightest servic to you. i fear i shall neverhav the opportun.” will spoke with fervor.“oh ye,” said dorothea, cordial. “it will come; and i shall rememberhow well you wish me. i quit hope that we should be friend when ifirst saw you—becaus of your relationship to mr. casaubon.” there wasa certain liquid bright in her ey, and will wa consciou thathi own were obei a law of natur and fill too. the allus tomr. casaubon would have spoil all if anyth at that moment couldhav spoil the subdu power, the sweet digniti, of her nobleunsuspici inexperi.“and there is on thing even now that you can do,” said dorothea,rise and walk a littl wai under the strength of a recurringimpuls. “promis me that you will not again, to ani on, speak of thatsubject—i mean about mr. casaubon’s write—i mean in that kind ofwai. it wa i who led to it. it wa my fault. but promis me.”she had return from her brief pace and stood opposit will, lookinggrav at him.“certainli, i will promis you,” said will, redden howev. if henev said a cut word about mr. casaubon again and left offreceiv favor from him, it would clearli be permiss to hate himth more. the poet must know how to hate, sai goeth; and will wa atleast readi with that accomplish. he said that he must go nowwithout wait for mr. casaubon, whom he would come to take leav ofat the last moment. dorothea gave him her hand, and thei exchang asimpl “good-by.”but go out of the _port cocher_ he met mr. casaubon, and thatgentleman, express the best wish for hi cousin, polit waivedth pleasur of ani further leav-take on the morrow, which would besuffici crowd with the prepar for departur.“i have someth to tell you about our cousin mr. ladislaw, which ithink will heighten your opinion of him,” said dorothea to her husbandin the cours of the even. she had mention immedi on hisent that will had just gone awai, and would come again, but mr.casaubon had said, “i met him outsid, and we made our final adieux, ibeliev,” sai thi with the air and tone by which we impli that anysubject, whether privat or public, doe not interest us enough to wishfor a further remark upon it. so dorothea had wait.“what is that, my love?” said mr casaubon (he alwai said “my love”when hi manner wa the coldest).“he ha made up hi mind to leav off wander at onc, and to give uphi depend on your generos. he mean soon to go back to england,and work hi own wai. i thought you would consid that a good sign,”said dorothea, with an appeal look into her husband’s neutral face.“did he mention the precis order of occup to which he wouldaddict himself?”“no. but he said that he felt the danger which lai for him in yourgeneros. of cours he will write to you about it. do you not thinkbett of him for hi resolv?”“i shall await hi commun on the subject,” said mr. casaubon.“i told him i wa sure that the thing you consid in all you did forhim wa hi own welfar. i rememb your good in what you saidabout him when i first saw him at lowick,” said dorothea, put herhand on her husband’s.“i had a duti toward him,” said mr. casaubon, lai hi other hand ondorothea’s in conscienti accept of her caress, but with a glancewhich he could not hinder from be uneasi. “the young man, i confess,is not otherwis an object of interest to me, nor need we, i think,discuss hi futur cours, which it is not our to determin beyond thelimit which i have suffici indic.” dorothea did not mentionwil again.book iii.wait for death.chapter xxiii.“your hors of the sun,” he said, “and first-rate whip apollo!whate’er thei be, i’ll eat my head, but i will beat them hollow.”fred vinci, we have seen, had a debt on hi mind, and though no suchimmateri burthen could depress that buoyant-heart young gentlemanfor mani hour togeth, there were circumst connect with thisdebt which made the thought of it unusu importun. the creditorwa mr. bambridg, a hors-dealer of the neighborhood, whose companywa much sought in middlemarch by young men understood to be “addictedto pleasur.” dure the vacat fred had natur requir moreamus than he had readi monei for, and mr. bambridg had beenaccommod enough not onli to trust him for the hire of hors andth accident expens of ruin a fine hunter, but also to make asmal advanc by which he might be abl to meet some loss atbilliard. the total debt wa a hundr and sixti pound. bambridg wasin no alarm about hi monei, be sure that young vinci had backer;but he had requir someth to show for it, and fred had at firstgiven a bill with hi own signatur. three month later he had renewedthi bill with the signatur of caleb garth. on both occas fred hadfelt confid that he should meet the bill himself, have ampl fundsat dispos in hi own hope. you will hardli demand that hisconfid should have a basi in extern fact; such confid, weknow, is someth less coars and materialist: it is a comfortabledisposit lead us to expect that the wisdom of provid or thefolli of our friend, the mysteri of luck or the still greatermysteri of our high individu valu in the univers, will bring aboutagre issu, such as ar consist with our good tast incostum, and our gener prefer for the best style of thing. fredfelt sure that he should have a present from hi uncl, that he shouldhav a run of luck, that by dint of “swap” he should graduallymetamorphos a hors worth forti pound into a hors that would fetch ahundr at ani moment—“judgment” be alwai equival to anunspecifi sum in hard cash. and in ani case, even suppos negationswhich onli a morbid distrust could imagin, fred had alwai (at thattim) hi father’s pocket as a last resourc, so that hi asset ofhop had a sort of gorgeou superflu about them. of whatmight be the capac of hi father’s pocket, fred had onli a vaguenot: wa not trade elast? and would not the defici of oneyear be made up for by the surplu of anoth? the vinci live in aneasi profus wai, not with ani new ostent, but accord to thefamili habit and tradit, so that the children had no standard ofeconomi, and the elder on retain some of their infantin notionthat their father might pai for anyth if he would. mr. vinci himselfhad expens middlemarch habit—spent monei on cours, on hiscellar, and on dinner-give, while mamma had those run accountswith tradespeopl, which give a cheer sens of get everythingon want without ani question of payment. but it wa in the natur offath, fred knew, to bulli on about expens: there wa alwai alittl storm over hi extravag if he had to disclos a debt, andfr dislik bad weather within door. he wa too filial to bedisrespect to hi father, and he bore the thunder with the certaintythat it wa transient; but in the mean time it wa disagre to seehi mother cry, and also to be oblig to look sulki instead of havingfun; for fred wa so good-temper that if he look glum underscold, it wa chiefli for proprieti’s sake. the easier courseplainli, wa to renew the bill with a friend’s signatur. why not? withth superflu secur of hope at hi command, there wa no reasonwhi he should not have increas other peopl’s liabil to anyext, but for the fact that men whose name were good for anythingwer usual pessimist, indispos to believ that the univers orderof thing would necessarili be agreeabl to an agreeabl younggentleman.with a favor to ask we review our list of friend, do justic to theirmor amiabl qualiti, forgiv their littl offens, and concerningeach in turn, try to arriv at the conclus that he will be eager tooblig us, our own eager to be oblig be as communic asoth warmth. still there is alwai a certain number who ar dismisseda but moder eager until the other have refus; and it happenedthat fred check off all hi friend but on, on the ground thatappli to them would be disagre; be implicitli convinc thath at least (whatev might be maintain about mankind gener) hada right to be free from anyth disagre. that he should ever fallinto a thoroughli unpleas posit—wear trouser shrunk withwash, eat cold mutton, have to walk for want of a hors, or to “duckund” in ani sort of wai—wa an absurd irreconcil with thosech intuit implant in him by natur. and fred winc underth idea of be look down upon as want fund for small debt.thu it came to pass that the friend whom he chose to appli to wa atonc the poorest and the kindest—name, caleb garth.the garth were veri fond of fred, as he wa of them; for when he androsamond were littl on, and the garth were better off, the slightconnect between the two famili through mr. featherston’s doublemarriag (the first to mr. garth’s sister, and the second to mr.vinci’s) had led to an acquaint which wa carri on between thechildren rather than the parent: the children drank tea togeth outof their toi teacup, and spent whole dai togeth in plai. mari wa alittl hoyden, and fred at six year old thought her the nicest girl inth world, make her hi wife with a brass ring which he had cut froman umbrella. through all the stage of hi educ he had kept hisaffect for the garth, and hi habit of go to their hous as asecond home, though ani intercours between them and the elder of hisfamili had long ceas. even when caleb garth wa prosper, thevinci were on condescend term with him and hi wife, for therewer nice distinct of rank in middlemarch; and though oldmanufactur could not ani more than duke be connect with none butequ, thei were consciou of an inher social superior which wasdefin with great niceti in practic, though hardli expressibletheoret. sinc then mr. garth had fail in the buildingbusi, which he had unfortun ad to hi other avoc ofsurveyor, valuer, and agent, had conduct that busi for a timeentir for the benefit of hi assigne, and had been livingnarrowli, exert himself to the utmost that he might after all paytwenti shill in the pound. he had now achiev thi, and from allwho did not think it a bad preced, hi honor exert had wonhim due esteem; but in no part of the world is genteel visit foundedon esteem, in the absenc of suitabl furnitur and completedinn-servic. mr. vinci had never been at her eas with mr. garth,and frequent spoke of her as a woman who had had to work for herbread—mean that mr. garth had been a teacher befor her marriag;in which case an intimaci with lindlei murrai and mangnal’s questionswa someth like a draper’s discrimin of calico trademark, or acouri’s acquaint with foreign countri: no woman who wa betteroff need that sort of thing. and sinc mari had been keep mr.featherston’s hous, mr. vinci’s want of like for the garth hadbeen convert into someth more posit, by alarm lest fred shouldengag himself to thi plain girl, whose parent “live in such a smallwai.” fred, be awar of thi, never spoke at home of hi visit tomr. garth, which had of late becom more frequent, the increasingardor of hi affect for mari inclin him the more toward thosewho belong to her.mr. garth had a small offic in the town, and to thi fred went withhi request. he obtain it without much difficulti, for a larg amountof pain experi had not suffic to make caleb garth cautiousabout hi own affair, or distrust of hi fellow-men when thei hadnot prove themselv untrustworthi; and he had the highest opinion offr, wa “sure the lad would turn out well—an open affectionatefellow, with a good bottom to hi charact—you might trust him foranyth.” such wa caleb’s psycholog argument. he wa on of thoserar men who ar rigid to themselv and indulg to other. he had acertain shame about hi neighbor’ error, and never spoke of themwillingli; henc he wa not like to divert hi mind from the bestmod of harden timber and other ingeni devic in order topreconc those error. if he had to blame ani on, it wa necessaryfor him to move all the paper within hi reach, or describ variousdiagram with hi stick, or make calcul with the odd monei in hispocket, befor he could begin; and he would rather do other men’s workthan find fault with their do. i fear he wa a bad disciplinarian.when fred state the circumst of hi debt, hi wish to meet itwithout troubl hi father, and the certainti that the monei would beforthcom so as to caus no on ani inconveni, caleb push hisspectacl upward, listen, look into hi favorit’s clear youngey, and believ him, not distinguish confid about the futurefrom verac about the past; but he felt that it wa an occas for afriendli hint as to conduct, and that befor give hi signatur hemust give a rather strong admonit. accordingli, he took the paperand lower hi spectacl, measur the space at hi command, reachedhi pen and examin it, dip it in the ink and examin it again,then push the paper a littl wai from him, lift up hi spectaclesagain, show a deepen depress in the outer angl of hi bushyeyebrow, which gave hi face a peculiar mild (pardon these detailsfor onc—you would have learn to love them if you had known calebgarth), and said in a comfort tone,—“it wa a misfortun, eh, that break the hors’s knee? and then,these exchang, thei don’t answer when you have ’cute jockei to dealwith. you’ll be wiser anoth time, my boi.”whereupon caleb drew down hi spectacl, and proceed to write hissignatur with the care which he alwai gave to that perform; forwhatev he did in the wai of busi he did well. he contempl thelarg well-proport letter and final flourish, with hi head atrifl on on side for an instant, then hand it to fred, said“good-by,” and return forthwith to hi absorpt in a plan for sirjam chettam’s new farm-build.either becaus hi interest in thi work thrust the incid of thesignatur from hi memori, or for some reason of which caleb wa moreconsci, mr. garth remain ignor of the affair.sinc it occur, a chang had come over fred’s sky, which alter hisview of the distanc, and wa the reason why hi uncl featherston’spresent of monei wa of import enough to make hi color come andgo, first with a too definit expect, and afterward with aproportion disappoint. hi failur in pass hi examin,had made hi accumul of colleg debt the more unpardon by hisfath, and there had been an unpreced storm at home. mr. vincyhad sworn that if he had anyth more of that sort to put up with,fred should turn out and get hi live how he could; and he had neveryet quit recov hi good-humor tone to hi son, who hadespeci enrag him by sai at thi stage of thing that he didnot want to be a clergyman, and would rather not “go on with that.”fred wa consciou that he would have been yet more sever dealt withif hi famili as well as himself had not secretli regard him as mr.featherston’s heir; that old gentleman’s pride in him, and apparentfond for him, serv in the stead of more exemplari conduct—justa when a youth nobleman steal jewelleri we call the actkleptomania, speak of it with a philosoph smile, and never think ofhi be sent to the hous of correct as if he were a rag boywho had stolen turnip. in fact, tacit expect of what would bedon for him by uncl featherston determin the angl at which mostpeopl view fred vinci in middlemarch; and in hi own conscious,what uncl featherston would do for him in an emerg, or what hewould do simpli as an incorpor luck, form alwai an immeasurabledepth of aerial perspect. but that present of bank-note, onc made,wa measur, and be appli to the amount of the debt, show adeficit which had still to be fill up either by fred’s “judgment” orbi luck in some other shape. for that littl episod of the allegedborrow, in which he had made hi father the agent in get thebulstrod certif, wa a new reason against go to hi father formonei toward meet hi actual debt. fred wa keen enough to foreseethat anger would confus distinct, and that hi denial of havingborrow expressli on the strength of hi uncl’s will would be takena a falsehood. he had gone to hi father and told him on vexatiousaffair, and he had left anoth untold: in such case the completerevel alwai produc the impress of a previou duplic. nowfr piqu himself on keep clear of li, and even fib; he oftenshrug hi shoulder and made a signific grimac at what he calledrosamond’s fib (it is onli brother who can associ such idea witha love girl); and rather than incur the accus of falsehood hewould even incur some troubl and self-restraint. it wa under stronginward pressur of thi kind that fred had taken the wise step ofdeposit the eighti pound with hi mother. it wa a piti that he hadnot at onc given them to mr. garth; but he meant to make the sumcomplet with anoth sixti, and with a view to thi, he had kepttwenti pound in hi own pocket as a sort of seed-corn, which, plantedbi judgment, and water by luck, might yield more than threefold—averi poor rate of multipl when the field is a young gentleman’sinfinit soul, with all the numer at command.fred wa not a gambler: he had not that specif diseas in which thesuspens of the whole nervou energi on a chanc or risk becom asnecessari as the dram to the drunkard; he had onli the tendenc to thatdiffus form of gambl which ha no alcohol intens, but iscarri on with the healthiest chyle-fed blood, keep up a joyousimagin activ which fashion event accord to desir, andhav no fear about it own weather, onli see the advantag theremust be to other in go aboard with it. hope ha a pleasurein make a throw of ani kind, becaus the prospect of success iscertain; and onli a more gener pleasur in offer as mani asposs a share in the stake. fred like plai, especi billiard,as he like hunt or ride a steepl-chase; and he onli like it thebett becaus he want monei and hope to win. but the twenti pound’worth of seed-corn had been plant in vain in the seduct greenplot—all of it at least which had not been dispers by theroadsid—and fred found himself close upon the term of payment with nomonei at command beyond the eighti pound which he had deposit withhi mother. the broken-wind hors which he rode repres a presentwhich had been made to him a long while ago by hi uncl featherston:hi father alwai allow him to keep a hors, mr. vinci’s own habitsmak him regard thi as a reason demand even for a son who wasrath exasper. thi hors, then, wa fred’s properti, and in hisanxieti to meet the immin bill he determin to sacrific apossess without which life would certainli be worth littl. he madeth resolut with a sens of heroism—heroism forc on him by thedread of break hi word to mr. garth, by hi love for mari and aweof her opinion. he would start for houndslei hors-fair which wa to beheld the next morn, and—simpli sell hi hors, bring back themonei by coach?—well, the hors would hardli fetch more than thirtypound, and there wa no know what might happen; it would be follyto balk himself of luck beforehand. it wa a hundr to on that somegood chanc would fall in hi wai; the longer he thought of it, theless possibl it seem that he should not have a good chanc, and theless reason that he should not equip himself with the powder andshot for bring it down. he would ride to houndslei with bambridgeand with horrock “the vet,” and without ask them anyth expressli,he should virtual get the benefit of their opinion. befor he setout, fred got the eighti pound from hi mother.most of those who saw fred ride out of middlemarch in compani withbambridg and horrock, on hi wai of cours to houndslei hors-fair,thought that young vinci wa pleasur-seek as usual; and but for anunwont conscious of grave matter on hand, he himself would havehad a sens of dissip, and of do what might be expect of agai young fellow. consid that fred wa not at all coars, that herath look down on the manner and speech of young men who had notbeen to the univers, and that he had written stanza as pastor andunvoluptu as hi flute-plai, hi attract toward bambridg andhorrock wa an interest fact which even the love of hors-fleshwould not wholli account for without that mysteri influenc ofnam which determin so much of mortal choic. under ani othernam than “pleasur” the societi of messieur bambridg and horrockmust certainli have been regard as monoton; and to arriv withthem at houndslei on a drizzl afternoon, to get down at the red lionin a street shade with coal-dust, and dine in a room furnish with adirt-enamel map of the counti, a bad portrait of an anonym horsein a stabl, hi majesti georg the fourth with leg and cravat, andvari leaden spittoon, might have seem a hard busi, but forth sustain power of nomenclatur which determin that the pursuitof these thing wa “gai.”in mr. horrock there wa certainli an appar unfathom whichoff plai to the imagin. costum, at a glanc, gave him athril associ with hors (enough to specifi the hat-brim whichtook the slightest upward angl just to escap the suspicion of bendingdownward), and natur had given him a face which by dint of mongolianey, and a nose, mouth, and chin seem to follow hi hat-brim in amoder inclin upward, gave the effect of a subdu unchangeablescept smile, of all express the most tyrann over asuscept mind, and, when accompani by adequ silenc, like tocreat the reput of an invinc understand, an infinit fundof humor—too dry to flow, and probabl in a state of immovablecrust,—and a critic judgment which, if you could ever be fortunateenough to know it, would be _the_ thing and no other. it is aphysiognomi seen in all vocat, but perhap it ha never been morepow over the youth of england than in a judg of hors.mr. horrock, at a question from fred about hi hors’s fetlock, turnedsidewai in hi saddl, and watch the hors’s action for the space ofthre minut, then turn forward, twitch hi own bridl, andremain silent with a profil neither more nor less sceptic than ithad been.the part thu plai in dialogu by mr. horrock wa terribl effect.a mixtur of passion wa excit in fred—a mad desir to thrashhorrock’s opinion into utter, restrain by anxieti to retain theadvantag of hi friendship. there wa alwai the chanc that horrockmight sai someth quit invalu at the right moment.mr. bambridg had more open manner, and appear to give forth hisidea without economi. he wa loud, robust, and wa sometim spoken ofa be “given to indulg”—chiefli in swear, drink, andbeat hi wife. some peopl who had lost by him call him a viciousman; but he regard hors-deal as the finest of the art, and mighthav argu plausibl that it had noth to do with moral. he wasundeni a prosper man, bore hi drink better than other boretheir moder, and, on the whole, flourish like the greenbai-tree. but hi rang of convers wa limit, and like the fineold tune, “drop of brandi,” gave you after a while a sens ofreturn upon itself in a wai that might make weak head dizzi. but aslight infus of mr. bambridg wa felt to give tone and charact tosever circl in middlemarch; and he wa a distinguish figur inth bar and billiard-room at the green dragon. he knew some anecdotesabout the hero of the turf, and variou clever trick of marquessesand viscount which seem to prove that blood assert itspr-emin even among black-leg; but the minut retent of hismemori wa chiefli shown about the hors he had himself bought andsold; the number of mile thei would trot you in no time withoutturn a hair be, after the laps of year, still a subject ofpassion assever, in which he would assist the imagin ofhi hearer by solemnli swear that thei never saw anyth like it.in short, mr. bambridg wa a man of pleasur and a gai companion.fred wa subtl, and did not tell hi friend that he wa go tohoundslei bent on sell hi hors: he wish to get indirectli attheir genuin opinion of it valu, not be awar that a genuineopinion wa the last thing like to be extract from such eminentcrit. it wa not mr. bambridg’s weak to be a gratuitousflatter. he had never befor been so much struck with the fact thatthi unfortun bai wa a roarer to a degre which requir theroundest word for perdit to give you ani idea of it.“you made a bad hand at swap when you went to anybodi but me,vinci! why, you never threw your leg across a finer hors than thatchestnut, and you gave him for thi brute. if you set him canter, hego on like twenti sawyer. i never heard but on wors roarer in mylif, and that wa a roan: it belong to pegwel, the corn-factor; heus to drive him in hi gig seven year ago, and he want me to takehim, but i said, ‘thank you, peg, i don’t deal in wind-instrument.’that wa what i said. it went the round of the countri, that joke did.but, what the hell! the hors wa a penni trumpet to that roarer ofyour.”“why, you said just now hi wa wors than mine,” said fred, moreirrit than usual.“i said a lie, then,” said mr. bambridg, emphat. “there wasn’t apenni to choos between ’em.”fred spur hi hors, and thei trot on a littl wai. when theyslacken again, mr. bambridg said—“not but what the roan wa a better trotter than your.”“i’m quit satisfi with hi pace, i know,” said fred, who requiredal the conscious of be in gai compani to support him; “i sayhi trot is an uncommonli clean on, eh, horrock?”mr. horrock look befor him with as complet a neutral as if hehad been a portrait by a great master.fred gave up the fallaci hope of get a genuin opinion; but onreflect he saw that bambridg’s depreci and horrock’s silencewer both virtual encourag, and indic that thei thought betterof the hors than thei chose to sai.that veri even, inde, befor the fair had set in, fred thought hesaw a favor open for dispos advantag of hi hors, butan open which made him congratul himself on hi foresight inbring with him hi eighti pound. a young farmer, acquaint withmr. bambridg, came into the red lion, and enter into conversationabout part with a hunter, which he introduc at onc as diamond,impli that it wa a public charact. for himself he onli want aus hack, which would draw upon occas; be about to marri andto give up hunt. the hunter wa in a friend’s stabl at some littledist; there wa still time for gentlemen to see it befor dark. thefriend’s stabl had to be reach through a back street where you mighta easili have been poison without expens of drug as in ani grimstreet of that unsanitari period. fred wa not fortifi againstdisgust by brandi, as hi companion were, but the hope of have atlast seen the hors that would enabl him to make monei wasexhilar enough to lead him over the same ground again the firstth in the morn. he felt sure that if he did not come to a bargainwith the farmer, bambridg would; for the stress of circumst, fredfelt, wa sharpen hi acut and endow him with all theconstruct power of suspicion. bambridg had run down diamond in awai that he never would have done (the hors be a friend’s) if hehad not thought of bui it; everi on who look at the anim—evenhorrock—wa evid impress with it merit. to get all theadvantag of be with men of thi sort, you must know how to drawyour infer, and not be a spoon who take thing liter. thecolor of the hors wa a dappl grai, and fred happen to know thatlord medlicot’s man wa on the look-out for just such a hors. afteral hi run down, bambridg let it out in the cours of theeven, when the farmer wa absent, that he had seen wors hors gofor eighti pound. of cours he contradict himself twenti time over,but when you know what is like to be true you can test a man’sadmiss. and fred could not but reckon hi own judgment of a horsea worth someth. the farmer had paus over fred’s respectablethough broken-wind steed long enough to show that he thought it worthconsider, and it seem probabl that he would take it, withfiv-and-twenti pound in addit, as the equival of diamond. inthat case fred, when he had part with hi new hors for at leasteighti pound, would be fifti-five pound in pocket by the transact,and would have a hundr and thirti-five pound toward meet thebil; so that the deficit temporarili thrown on mr. garth would at theutmost be twenti-five pound. by the time he wa hurri on hiscloth in the morn, he saw so clearli the import of not losingthi rare chanc, that if bambridg and horrock had both dissuad him,he would not have been delud into a direct interpret of theirpurpos: he would have been awar that those deep hand held somethingels than a young fellow’s interest. with regard to hors, distrustwa your onli clew. but sceptic, as we know, can never be thoroughlyappli, els life would come to a standstil: someth we mustbeliev in and do, and whatev that someth mai be call, it isvirtu our own judgment, even when it seem like the most slavishreli on anoth. fred believ in the excel of hi bargain,and even befor the fair had well set in, had got possess of thedappl grai, at the price of hi old hors and thirti pound inaddit—onli five pound more than he had expect to give.but he felt a littl worri and weari, perhap with mental debat,and without wait for the further gayeti of the hors-fair, he setout alon on hi fourteen mile’ journei, mean to take it veryquietli and keep hi hors fresh.chapter xxiv.“the offend’s sorrow bring but small reliefto him who wear the strong offenc’s cross.”—shakespear: _sonnet_.i am sorri to sai that onli the third dai after the propiti eventsat houndslei fred vinci had fallen into wors spirit than he had knownin hi life befor. not that he had been disappoint as to theposs market for hi hors, but that befor the bargain could beconclud with lord medlicot’s man, thi diamond, in which hope to theamount of eighti pound had been invest, had without the slightestwarn exhibit in the stabl a most viciou energi in kick, hadjust miss kill the groom, and had end in lame himself severelybi catch hi leg in a rope that overhung the stabl-board. there wasno more redress for thi than for the discoveri of bad temper aftermarriag—which of cours old companion were awar of befor theceremoni. for some reason or other, fred had none of hi usualelast under thi stroke of ill-fortun: he wa simpli awar thath had onli fifti pound, that there wa no chanc of hi get anymor at present, and that the bill for a hundr and sixti would bepres in five dai. even if he had appli to hi father on theplea that mr. garth should be save from loss, fred felt smartinglythat hi father would angrili refus to rescu mr. garth from theconsequ of what he would call encourag extravag and deceit.he wa so utterli downcast that he could frame no other project than togo straight to mr. garth and tell him the sad truth, carri with himth fifti pound, and get that sum at least safe out of hi ownhand. hi father, be at the warehous, did not yet know of theaccid: when he did, he would storm about the viciou brute beingbrought into hi stabl; and befor meet that lesser annoy fredwant to get awai with all hi courag to face the greater. he tookhi father’s nag, for he had made up hi mind that when he had told mr.garth, he would ride to stone court and confess all to mari. in fact,it is probabl that but for mari’s exist and fred’s love for her,hi conscienc would have been much less activ both in previouslyurg the debt on hi thought and impel him not to spare himselfaft hi usual fashion by defer an unpleas task, but to act asdirectli and simpli as he could. even much stronger mortal than fredvinci hold half their rectitud in the mind of the be thei lovebest. “the theatr of all my action is fallen,” said an antiquepersonag when hi chief friend wa dead; and thei ar fortun whoget a theatr where the audienc demand their best. certainli it wouldhav made a consider differ to fred at that time if mari garthhad had no decid notion as to what wa admir in charact.mr. garth wa not at the offic, and fred rode on to hi hous, whichwa a littl wai outsid the town—a home place with an orchard infront of it, a rambl, old-fashion, half-timber build, whichbefor the town had spread had been a farm-hous, but wa nowsurround with the privat garden of the townsmen. we get the fonderof our hous if thei have a physiognomi of their own, as our friendshav. the garth famili, which wa rather a larg on, for mari had fourbroth and on sister, were veri fond of their old hous, from whichal the best furnitur had long been sold. fred like it too, knowingit by heart even to the attic which smelt delici of appl andquinc, and until to-dai he had never come to it without pleasantexpect; but hi heart beat uneasili now with the sens that heshould probabl have to make hi confess befor mr. garth, of whomh wa rather more in aw than of her husband. not that she wasinclin to sarcasm and to impuls salli, as mari wa. in herpres matronli ag at least, mr. garth never commit herself byover-hasti speech; have, as she said, born the yoke in her youth,and learn self-control. she had that rare sens which discern whati unalter, and submit to it without murmur. ador herhusband’s virtu, she had veri earli made up her mind to hisincapac of mind hi own interest, and had met the consequencescheerfulli. she had been magnanim enough to renounc all pride inteapot or children’s frill, and had never pour ani patheticconfid into the ear of her feminin neighbor concern mr.garth’s want of prudenc and the sum he might have had if he had beenlik other men. henc these fair neighbor thought her either proud oreccentr, and sometim spoke of her to their husband as “your finemr. garth.” she wa not without her critic of them in return, beingmor accur instruct than most matron in middlemarch, and—wherei the blameless woman?—apt to be a littl sever toward her own sex,which in her opinion wa frame to be entir subordin. on theother hand, she wa disproportion indulg toward the failingsof men, and wa often heard to sai that these were natur. also, itmust be admit that mr. garth wa a trifl too emphat in herresist to what she held to be folli: the passag from governessinto housewif had wrought itself a littl too strongli into herconsci, and she rare forgot that while her grammar and accentwer abov the town standard, she wore a plain cap, cook the familydinn, and darn all the stock. she had sometim taken pupil ina peripatet fashion, make them follow her about in the kitchen withtheir book or slate. she thought it good for them to see that she couldmak an excel lather while she correct their blunder “withoutlook,”—that a woman with her sleev tuck up abov her elbowsmight know all about the subjunct mood or the torrid zone—that, inshort, she might possess “educ” and other good thing end in“tion,” and worthi to be pronounc emphat, without be auseless doll. when she made remark to thi edifi effect, she had afirm littl frown on her brow, which yet did not hinder her face fromlook benevol, and her word which came forth like a processionwer utter in a fervid agreeabl contralto. certainli, the exemplarymr. garth had her droll aspect, but her charact sustain herodd, as a veri fine wine sustain a flavor of skin.toward fred vinci she had a motherli feel, and had alwai beendispos to excus hi error, though she would probabl not haveexcus mari for engag herself to him, her daughter be includedin that more rigor judgment which she appli to her own sex. butthi veri fact of her except indulg toward him made it thehard to fred that he must now inevit sink in her opinion. and thecircumst of hi visit turn out to be still more unpleas thanh had expect; for caleb garth had gone out earli to look at somerepair not far off. mr. garth at certain hour wa alwai in thekitchen, and thi morn she wa carri on sever occup atonc there—make her pi at the well-scour deal tabl on on sideof that airi room, observ salli’s movement at the oven anddough-tub through an open door, and give lesson to her youngest boyand girl, who were stand opposit to her at the tabl with theirbook and slate befor them. a tub and a cloth-hors at the otherend of the kitchen indic an intermitt wash of small thing alsogo on.mr. garth, with her sleev turn abov her elbow, deftli handlingh pastri—appli her roll-pin and give ornament pinch,while she expound with grammat fervor what were the right viewsabout the concord of verb and pronoun with “noun of multitud orsignifi mani,” wa a sight agreeabl amus. she wa of the samecurli-hair, squar-face type as mari, but handsom, with moredelicaci of featur, a pale skin, a solid matronli figur, and aremark firm of glanc. in her snowi-frill cap she remindedon of that delight frenchwoman whom we have all seen market,basket on arm. look at the mother, you might hope that the daughterwould becom like her, which is a prospect advantag equal to adowri—the mother too often stand behind the daughter like amalign propheci—“such as i am, she will shortli be.”“now let us go through that onc more,” said mr. garth, pinch anappl-puff which seem to distract ben, an energet young male with aheavi brow, from due attent to the lesson. “‘not without regard toth import of the word as convei uniti or plural of idea’—tell meagain what that mean, ben.”(mr. garth, like more celebr educ, had her favorit ancientpath, and in a gener wreck of societi would have tri to hold her“lindlei murrai” abov the wave.)“oh—it mean—you must think what you mean,” said ben, rather peevishli.“i hate grammar. what’s the us of it?”“to teach you to speak and write correctli, so that you can beunderstood,” said mr. garth, with sever precis. “should you liketo speak as old job doe?”“ye,” said ben, stoutli; “it’s funnier. he sai, ‘yo goo’—that’s justa good as ‘you go.’”“but he sai, ‘a ship’s in the garden,’ instead of ‘a sheep,’” saidletti, with an air of superior. “you might think he meant a ship offth sea.”“no, you mightn’t, if you weren’t silli,” said ben. “how could a shipoff the sea come there?”“these thing belong onli to pronunci, which is the least part ofgrammar,” said mr. garth. “that appl-peel is to be eaten by the pig,ben; if you eat it, i must give them your piec of pasti. job ha onlyto speak about veri plain thing. how do you think you would write orspeak about anyth more difficult, if you knew no more of grammarthan he doe? you would us wrong word, and put word in the wrongplac, and instead of make peopl understand you, thei would turnawai from you as a tiresom person. what would you do then?”“i shouldn’t care, i should leav off,” said ben, with a sens thatthi wa an agreeabl issu where grammar wa concern.“i see you ar get tire and stupid, ben,” said mr. garth,accustom to these obstruct argument from her male offspr.have finish her pi, she move toward the cloth-hors, andsaid, “come here and tell me the stori i told you on wednesdai, aboutcincinnatu.”“i know! he wa a farmer,” said ben.“now, ben, he wa a roman—let _me_ tell,” said letti, us her elbowcontenti.“you silli thing, he wa a roman farmer, and he wa plough.”“ye, but befor that—that didn’t come first—peopl want him,” saidletti.“well, but you must sai what sort of a man he wa first,” insist ben.“he wa a wise man, like my father, and that made the peopl want hisadvic. and he wa a brave man, and could fight. and so could myfath—couldn’t he, mother?”“now, ben, let me tell the stori straight on, as mother told it us,”said letti, frown. “pleas, mother, tell ben not to speak.”“letti, i am asham of you,” said her mother, wring out the capsfrom the tub. “when your brother began, you ought to have wait to seeif he could not tell the stori. how rude you look, push andfrown, as if you want to conquer with your elbow! cincinnatu, iam sure, would have been sorri to see hi daughter behav so.” (mr.garth deliv thi aw sentenc with much majesti of enunci,and letti felt that between repress volubl and gener disesteem,that of the roman inclus, life wa alreadi a pain affair.) “now,ben.”“well—oh—well—why, there wa a great deal of fight, and thei wereal blockhead, and—i can’t tell it just how you told it—but theywant a man to be captain and king and everyth—”“dictat, now,” said letti, with injur look, and not without a wishto make her mother repent.“veri well, dictat!” said ben, contemptu. “but that isn’t a goodword: he didn’t tell them to write on slate.”“come, come, ben, you ar not so ignor as that,” said mr. garth,carefulli seriou. “hark, there is a knock at the door! run, letti, andopen it.”the knock wa fred’s; and when letti said that her father wa not inyet, but that her mother wa in the kitchen, fred had no altern.he could not depart from hi usual practic of go to see mr. garthin the kitchen if she happen to be at work there. he put hi armround letti’s neck silent, and led her into the kitchen without hisusu joke and caress.mr. garth wa surpris to see fred at thi hour, but surpris wa nota feel that she wa given to express, and she onli said, quietlycontinu her work—“you, fred, so earli in the dai? you look quit pale. ha anythinghappen?”“i want to speak to mr. garth,” said fred, not yet readi to saymor—“and to you also,” he ad, after a littl paus, for he had nodoubt that mr. garth knew everyth about the bill, and he must inth end speak of it befor her, if not to her sole.“caleb will be in again in a few minut,” said mr. garth, whoimagin some troubl between fred and hi father. “he is sure not tobe long, becaus he ha some work at hi desk that must be done thismorn. do you mind stai with me, while i finish my matter here?”“but we needn’t go on about cincinnatu, need we?” said ben, who hadtaken fred’s whip out of hi hand, and wa try it effici on thecat.“no, go out now. but put that whip down. how veri mean of you to whippoor old tortois! prai take the whip from him, fred.”“come, old boi, give it me,” said fred, put out hi hand.“will you let me ride on your hors to-dai?” said ben, render up thewhip, with an air of not be oblig to do it.“not to-dai—anoth time. i am not ride my own hors.”“shall you see mari to-dai?”“ye, i think so,” said fred, with an unpleas twing.“tell her to come home soon, and plai at forfeit, and make fun.”“enough, enough, ben! run awai,” said mr. garth, see that fred wasteas.“ar letti and ben your onli pupil now, mr. garth?” said fred, whenth children were gone and it wa need to sai someth that wouldpass the time. he wa not yet sure whether he should wait for mr.garth, or us ani good opportun in convers to confess to mr.garth herself, give her the monei and ride awai.“on—onli on. fanni hackbutt come at half past eleven. i am notget a great incom now,” said mr. garth, smile. “i am at a lowebb with pupil. but i have save my littl purs for alfr’s premium:i have nineti-two pound. he can go to mr. hanmer’s now; he is just atth right ag.”thi did not lead well toward the new that mr. garth wa on the brinkof lose nineti-two pound and more. fred wa silent. “young gentlemenwho go to colleg ar rather more costli than that,” mr. garthinnoc continu, pull out the edg on a cap-border. “andcaleb think that alfr will turn out a distinguish engin: hewant to give the boi a good chanc. there he is! i hear him come in.we will go to him in the parlor, shall we?”when thei enter the parlor caleb had thrown down hi hat and wasseat at hi desk.“what! fred, my boi!” he said, in a tone of mild surpris, hold hispen still undip; “you ar here betim.” but miss the usualexpress of cheer greet in fred’s face, he immedi ad,“is there anyth up at home?—anyth the matter?”“ye, mr. garth, i am come to tell someth that i am afraid will givey a bad opinion of me. i am come to tell you and mr. garth that ican’t keep my word. i can’t find the monei to meet the bill after all.i have been unfortun; i have onli got these fifti pound toward thehundr and sixti.”while fred wa speak, he had taken out the note and laid them onth desk befor mr. garth. he had burst forth at onc with the plainfact, feel boyishli miser and without verbal resourc. mr.garth wa mute astonish, and look at her husband for anexplan. caleb blush, and after a littl paus said—“oh, i didn’t tell you, susan: i put my name to a bill for fred; it wasfor a hundr and sixti pound. he made sure he could meet it himself.”there wa an evid chang in mr. garth’s face, but it wa like achang below the surfac of water which remain smooth. she fix herey on fred, sai—“i suppos you have ask your father for the rest of the monei and heha refus you.”“no,” said fred, bite hi lip, and speak with more difficulti;“but i know it will be of no us to ask him; and unless it were of us,i should not like to mention mr. garth’s name in the matter.”“it ha come at an unfortun time,” said caleb, in hi hesitatingwai, look down at the note and nervous finger the paper,“christma upon us—i’m rather hard up just now. you see, i have to cutout everyth like a tailor with short measur. what can we do, susan?i shall want everi farth we have in the bank. it’s a hundr and tenpound, the deuc take it!”“i must give you the nineti-two pound that i have put by for alfr’spremium,” said mr. garth, grave and decis, though a nice earmight have discern a slight tremor in some of the word. “and i haveno doubt that mari ha twenti pound save from her salari by thistim. she will advanc it.”mr. garth had not again look at fred, and wa not in the leastcalcul what word she should us to cut him the most effect.like the eccentr woman she wa, she wa at present absorb inconsid what wa to be done, and did not fanci that the end couldb better achiev by bitter remark or explos. but she had madefr feel for the first time someth like the tooth of remors.curious enough, hi pain in the affair beforehand had consistedalmost entir in the sens that he must seem dishonor, and sinkin the opinion of the garth: he had not occupi himself with theinconveni and possibl injuri that hi breach might occas them,for thi exercis of the imagin on other peopl’s need is notcommon with hope young gentlemen. inde we ar most of us broughtup in the notion that the highest motiv for not do a wrong issometh irrespect of the be who would suffer the wrong. but atthi moment he suddenli saw himself as a piti rascal who wa robbingtwo women of their save.“i shall certainli pai it all, mr. garth—ultim,” he stammeredout.“ye, ultim,” said mr. garth, who have a special dislik tofin word on ugli occas, could not now repress an epigram. “butboi cannot well be apprent ultim: thei should be apprenticedat fifteen.” she had never been so littl inclin to make excus forfr.“i wa the most in the wrong, susan,” said caleb. “fred made sure offind the monei. but i’d no busi to be finger bill. i supposey have look all round and tri all honest mean?” he ad, fixinghi merci grai ey on fred. caleb wa too delic to specifi mr.featherston.“ye, i have tri everyth—i realli have. i should have had ahundr and thirti pound readi but for a misfortun with a hors whichi wa about to sell. my uncl had given me eighti pound, and i paidawai thirti with my old hors in order to get anoth which i wa goingto sell for eighti or more—i meant to go without a hors—but now it hasturn out viciou and lame itself. i wish i and the hors too hadbeen at the devil, befor i had brought thi on you. there’s no oneels i care so much for: you and mr. garth have alwai been so kind tome. howev, it’s no us sai that. you will alwai think me a rascalnow.”fred turn round and hurri out of the room, consciou that he wasget rather womanish, and feel confusedli that hi be sorrywa not of much us to the garth. thei could see him mount, andquickli pass through the gate.“i am disappoint in fred vinci,” said mr. garth. “i would not havebeliev beforehand that he would have drawn you into hi debt. i knewh wa extravag, but i did not think that he would be so mean as tohang hi risk on hi oldest friend, who could the least afford tolos.”“i wa a fool, susan.”“that you were,” said the wife, nod and smile. “but i should nothav gone to publish it in the market-place. why should you keep suchth from me? it is just so with your button: you let them burst offwithout tell me, and go out with your wristband hang. if i hadonli known i might have been readi with some better plan.”“you ar sadli cut up, i know, susan,” said caleb, look feelingli ather. “i can’t abid your lose the monei you’ve scrape togeth foralfr.”“it is veri well that i _had_ scrape it togeth; and it is you whowil have to suffer, for you must teach the boi yourself. you must giveup your bad habit. some men take to drink, and you have taken towork without pai. you must indulg yourself a littl less in that.and you must ride over to mari, and ask the child what monei she ha.”caleb had push hi chair back, and wa lean forward, shake hishead slowli, and fit hi finger-tip togeth with much niceti.“poor mari!” he said. “susan,” he went on in a lower tone, “i’mafraid she mai be fond of fred.”“oh no! she alwai laugh at him; and he is not like to think of herin ani other than a brotherli wai.”caleb made no rejoind, but present lower hi spectacl, drew uphi chair to the desk, and said, “deuc take the bill—i wish it wa athanov! these thing ar a sad interrupt to busi!”the first part of thi speech compris hi whole store of maledictoryexpress, and wa utter with a slight snarl easi to imagin. but itwould be difficult to convei to those who never heard him utter theword “busi,” the peculiar tone of fervid vener, of religiousregard, in which he wrap it, as a consecr symbol is wrap init gold-fring linen.caleb garth often shook hi head in medit on the valu, theindispens might of that myriad-head, myriad-hand labor by whichth social bodi is fed, cloth, and hous. it had laid hold of hisimagin in boyhood. the echo of the great hammer where roof orkeel were a-make, the signal-shout of the workmen, the roar of thefurnac, the thunder and plash of the engin, were a sublim music tohim; the fell and lade of timber, and the huge trunk vibratingstar-like in the distanc along the highwai, the crane at work on thewharf, the pile-up produc in warehous, the precis and varieti ofmuscular effort wherev exact work had to be turn out,—all thesesight of hi youth had act on him as poetri without the aid of thepoet, had made a philosophi for him without the aid of philosoph, areligion without the aid of theologi. hi earli ambit had been tohav as effect a share as possibl in thi sublim labor, which waspeculiarli dignifi by him with the name of “busi;” and though hehad onli been a short time under a surveyor, and had been chiefli hisown teacher, he knew more of land, build, and mine than most ofth special men in the counti.hi classif of human employ wa rather crude, and, like thecategori of more celebr men, would not be accept in theseadvanc time. he divid them into “busi, polit, preach,learn, and amus.” he had noth to sai against the last four;but he regard them as a reverenti pagan regard other god thanhi own. in the same wai, he thought veri well of all rank, but hewould not himself have like to be of ani rank in which he had not suchclos contact with “busi” as to get often honor decor withmark of dust and mortar, the damp of the engin, or the sweet soil ofth wood and field. though he had never regard himself as otherthan an orthodox christian, and would argu on preveni grace if thesubject were propos to him, i think hi virtual divin were goodpract scheme, accur work, and the faith complet ofundertak: hi princ of dark wa a slack workman. but there wasno spirit of denial in caleb, and the world seem so wondrou to himthat he wa readi to accept ani number of system, like ani number offirma, if thei did not obvious interfer with the bestland-drainag, solid build, correct measur, and judici bore(for coal). in fact, he had a reverenti soul with a strong practicalintellig. but he could not manag financ: he knew valu well, buth had no keen of imagin for monetari result in the shape ofprofit and loss: and have ascertain thi to hi cost, he determinedto give up all form of hi belov “busi” which requir thattal. he gave himself up entir to the mani kind of work which hecould do without handl capit, and wa on of those preciou menwithin hi own district whom everybodi would choos to work for them,becaus he did hi work well, charg veri littl, and often declinedto charg at all. it is no wonder, then, that the garth were poor, and“live in a small wai.” howev, thei did not mind it.chapter xxv.“love seeketh not itself to pleas, nor for itself hath ani carebut for anoth give it eas and build a heaven in hell’s despair.. . . . . . .love seeketh onli self to pleas, to bind anoth to it delight,joi in anoth’s loss of eas, and build a hell in heaven’s despit.”—w. blake: _song of experi_.fred vinci want to arriv at stone court when mari could not expecthim, and when hi uncl wa not downstair: in that case she might besit alon in the wainscot parlor. he left hi hors in the yardto avoid make a nois on the gravel in front, and enter the parlorwithout other notic than the nois of the door-handl. mari wa in herusu corner, laugh over mr. piozzi’s recollect of johnson, andlook up with the fun still in her face. it gradual fade as she sawfr approach her without speak, and stand befor her with hi elbowon the mantel-piec, look ill. she too wa silent, onli rais herey to him inquiringli.“mari,” he began, “i am a good-for-noth blackguard.”“i should think on of those epithet would do at a time,” said mari,try to smile, but feel alarm.“i know you will never think well of me ani more. you will think me aliar. you will think me dishonest. you will think i didn’t care foryou, or your father and mother. you alwai do make the worst of me, iknow.”“i cannot deni that i shall think all that of you, fred, if you give megood reason. but pleas to tell me at onc what you have done. i wouldrath know the pain truth than imagin it.”“i ow monei—a hundr and sixti pound. i ask your father to puthi name to a bill. i thought it would not signifi to him. i made sureof pai the monei myself, and i have tri as hard as i could. andnow, i have been so unlucki—a hors ha turn out badli—i can onli payfifti pound. and i can’t ask my father for the monei: he would notgiv me a farth. and my uncl gave me a hundr a littl while ago.so what can i do? and now your father ha no readi monei to spare, andyour mother will have to pai awai her nineti-two pound that she hassav, and she sai your save must go too. you see what a—”“oh, poor mother, poor father!” said mari, her ey fill with tear,and a littl sob rise which she tri to repress. she look straightbefor her and took no notic of fred, all the consequ at homebecom present to her. he too remain silent for some moment,feel more miser than ever. “i wouldn’t have hurt you for theworld, mari,” he said at last. “you can never forgiv me.”“what doe it matter whether i forgiv you?” said mari, passion.“would that make it ani better for my mother to lose the monei she hasbeen earn by lesson for four year, that she might send alfr tomr. hanmer’s? should you think all that pleasant enough if i forgavey?”“sai what you like, mari. i deserv it all.”“i don’t want to sai anyth,” said mari, more quietli, “and my angeri of no us.” she dri her ey, threw asid her book, rose andfetch her sew.fred follow her with hi ey, hope that thei would meet her, andin that wai find access for hi implor penit. but no! mari couldeasili avoid look upward.“i do care about your mother’s monei go,” he said, when she wasseat again and sew quickli. “i want to ask you, mari—don’t youthink that mr. featherston—if you were to tell him—tell him, i mean,about apprent alfr—would advanc the monei?”“my famili is not fond of beg, fred. we would rather work for ourmonei. besid, you sai that mr. featherston ha late given you ahundr pound. he rare make present; he ha never made present tou. i am sure my father will not ask him for anyth; and even if ichos to beg of him, it would be of no us.”“i am so miser, mari—if you knew how miser i am, you would besorri for me.”“there ar other thing to be more sorri for than that. but selfishpeopl alwai think their own discomfort of more import thananyth els in the world. i see enough of that everi dai.”“it is hardli fair to call me selfish. if you knew what thing otheryoung men do, you would think me a good wai off the worst.”“i know that peopl who spend a great deal of monei on themselveswithout know how thei shall pai, must be selfish. thei ar alwaysthink of what thei can get for themselv, and not of what otherpeopl mai lose.”“ani man mai be unfortun, mari, and find himself unabl to pai whenh meant it. there is not a better man in the world than your father,and yet he got into troubl.”“how dare you make ani comparison between my father and you, fred?”said mari, in a deep tone of indign. “he never got into troubl bythink of hi own idl pleasur, but becaus he wa alwai thinkingof the work he wa do for other peopl. and he ha fare hard, andwork hard to make good everybodi’s loss.”“and you think that i shall never try to make good anyth, mari. iti not gener to believ the worst of a man. when you have got anypow over him, i think you might try and us it to make him better;but that is what you never do. howev, i’m go,” fred end,languidli. “i shall never speak to you about anyth again. i’m verysorri for all the troubl i’ve caus—that’s all.”mari had drop her work out of her hand and look up. there is oftensometh matern even in a girlish love, and mari’s hard experiencehad wrought her natur to an impress veri differ from thathard slight thing which we call girlish. at fred’s last word shefelt an instantan pang, someth like what a mother feel at theimagin sob or cri of her naughti truant child, which mai loseitself and get harm. and when, look up, her ey met hi dulldespair glanc, her piti for him surmount her anger and all heroth anxieti.“oh, fred, how ill you look! sit down a moment. don’t go yet. let metel uncl that you ar here. he ha been wonder that he ha notseen you for a whole week.” mari spoke hurriedli, sai the word thatcam first without know veri well what thei were, but sai them ina half-sooth half-beseech tone, and rise as if to go awai tomr. featherston. of cours fred felt as if the cloud had part and agleam had come: he move and stood in her wai.“sai on word, mari, and i will do anyth. sai you will not think theworst of me—will not give me up altogeth.”“as if it were ani pleasur to me to think ill of you,” said mari, in amourn tone. “as if it were not veri pain to me to see you an idlefrivol creatur. how can you bear to be so contempt, when othersar work and strive, and there ar so mani thing to be done—howcan you bear to be fit for noth in the world that is us? andwith so much good in your disposit, fred,—you might be worth a greatdeal.”“i will try to be anyth you like, mari, if you will sai that youlov me.”“i should be asham to sai that i love a man who must alwai behang on other, and reckon on what thei would do for him. whatwil you be when you ar forti? like mr. bowyer, i suppos—just asidl, live in mr. beck’s front parlor—fat and shabbi, hopingsomebodi will invit you to dinner—spend your morn in learn acom song—oh no! learn a tune on the flute.”mari’s lip had begun to curl with a smile as soon as she had askedthat question about fred’s futur (young soul ar mobil), and beforesh end, her face had it full illumin of fun. to him it waslik the cessat of an ach that mari could laugh at him, and with apass sort of smile he tri to reach her hand; but she slip awayquickli toward the door and said, “i shall tell uncl. you _must_ seehim for a moment or two.”fred secretli felt that hi futur wa guarante against thefulfil of mari’s sarcast propheci, apart from that “anyth”which he wa readi to do if she would defin it. he never dare inmari’s presenc to approach the subject of hi expect from mr.featherston, and she alwai ignor them, as if everyth depend onhimself. but if ever he actual came into the properti, she mustrecogn the chang in hi posit. all thi pass through hi mindsomewhat languidli, befor he went up to see hi uncl. he stai but alittl while, excus himself on the ground that he had a cold; andmari did not reappear befor he left the hous. but as he rode home, hebegan to be more consciou of be ill, than of be melancholi.when caleb garth arriv at stone court soon after dusk, mari wa notsurpris, although he seldom had leisur for pai her a visit, andwa not at all fond of have to talk with mr. featherston. the oldman, on the other hand, felt himself ill at eas with a brother-in-lawwhom he could not annoi, who did not mind about be consid poor,had noth to ask of him, and understood all kind of farm andmin busi better than he did. but mari had felt sure that herpar would want to see her, and if her father had not come, shewould have obtain leav to go home for an hour or two the next dai.after discuss price dure tea with mr. featherston, caleb rose tobid him good-by, and said, “i want to speak to you, mari.”she took a candl into anoth larg parlor, where there wa no fire,and set down the feebl light on the dark mahogani tabl, turnedround to her father, and put her arm round hi neck kiss himwith childish kiss which he delight in,—the express of hi largebrow soften as the express of a great beauti dog soften whenit is caress. mari wa hi favorit child, and whatev susan mightsai, and right as she wa on all other subject, caleb thought itnatur that fred or ani on els should think mari more lovabl thanoth girl.“i’ve got someth to tell you, my dear,” said caleb in hi hesitatingwai. “no veri good new; but then it might be wors.”“about monei, father? i think i know what it is.”“ay? how can that be? you see, i’ve been a bit of a fool again, and putmi name to a bill, and now it come to pai; and your mother ha gotto part with her save, that’s the worst of it, and even thei won’tquit make thing even. we want a hundr and ten pound: your motherha nineti-two, and i have none to spare in the bank; and she thinksthat you have some save.”“oh ye; i have more than four-and-twenti pound. i thought you wouldcom, father, so i put it in my bag. see! beauti white note andgold.”mari took out the fold monei from her reticul and put it into herfath’s hand.“well, but how—we onli want eighteen—here, put the rest back,child,—but how did you know about it?” said caleb, who, in hisunconquer indiffer to monei, wa begin to be chieflyconcern about the relat the affair might have to mari’saffect.“fred told me thi morn.”“ah! did he come on purpos?”“ye, i think so. he wa a good deal distress.”“i’m afraid fred is not to be trust, mari,” said the father, withhesit tender. “he mean better than he act, perhap. but ishould think it a piti for ani bodi’s happi to be wrap up inhim, and so would your mother.”“and so should i, father,” said mari, not look up, but put theback of her father’s hand against her cheek.“i don’t want to pry, my dear. but i wa afraid there might besometh between you and fred, and i want to caution you. you see,mari”—here caleb’s voic becam more tender; he had been push hishat about on the tabl and look at it, but final he turn hisey on hi daughter—“a woman, let her be as good as she mai, ha gotto put up with the life her husband make for her. your mother ha hadto put up with a good deal becaus of me.”mari turn the back of her father’s hand to her lip and smile athim.“well, well, nobodi’s perfect, but”—here mr. garth shook hi head tohelp out the inadequaci of word—“what i am think of is—what it mustb for a wife when she’s never sure of her husband, when he hasn’t gota principl in him to make him more afraid of do the wrong thing byother than of get hi own toe pinch. that’s the long and theshort of it, mari. young folk mai get fond of each other befor theyknow what life is, and thei mai think it all holidai if thei can onlyget togeth; but it soon turn into work dai, my dear. howev, youhav more sens than most, and you haven’t been kept in cotton-wool:there mai be no occas for me to sai thi, but a father trembl forhi daughter, and you ar all by yourself here.”“don’t fear for me, father,” said mari, grave meet her father’sey; “fred ha alwai been veri good to me; he is kind-heart andaffection, and not fals, i think, with all hi self-indulg. buti will never engag myself to on who ha no manli independ, andwho goe on loiter awai hi time on the chanc that other willprovid for him. you and my mother have taught me too much pride forthat.”“that’s right—that’s right. then i am easi,” said mr. garth, take uphi hat. “but it’s hard to run awai with your earn, eh child.”“father!” said mari, in her deepest tone of remonstr. “takepocket of love besid to them all at home,” wa her last wordbefor he close the outer door on himself.“i suppos your father want your earn,” said old mr.featherston, with hi usual power of unpleas surmis, when maryreturn to him. “he make but a tight fit, i reckon. you’re of agenow; you ought to be save for yourself.”“i consid my father and mother the best part of myself, sir,” saidmari, coldli.mr. featherston grunt: he could not deni that an ordinari sort ofgirl like her might be expect to be us, so he thought of anotherrejoind, disagre enough to be alwai apropo. “if fred vincycom to-morrow, now, don’t you keep him chatter: let him come up tome.”chapter xxvi.he beat me and i rail at him: o worthi satisfact! would it wereotherwis—that i could beat him while he rail at me.—_troilu andcressida_.but fred did not go to stone court the next dai, for reason that werequit peremptori. from those visit to unsanitari houndslei street insearch of diamond, he had brought back not onli a bad bargain inhors-flesh, but the further misfortun of some ailment which for a dayor two had deem mere depress and headach, but which got so muchwors when he return from hi visit to stone court that, go intoth dine-room, he threw himself on the sofa, and in answer to hismoth’s anxiou question, said, “i feel veri ill: i think you mustsend for wrench.”wrench came, but did not apprehend anyth seriou, spoke of a “slightderang,” and did not speak of come again on the morrow. he had adu valu for the vinci’ hous, but the wariest men ar apt to bedul by routin, and on worri morn will sometim go throughtheir busi with the zest of the daili bell-ringer. mr. wrench wa asmal, neat, biliou man, with a well-dress wig: he had a laboriouspractic, an irasc temper, a lymphat wife and seven children; andh wa alreadi rather late befor set out on a four-mile drive tomeet dr. minchin on the other side of tipton, the deceas of hick, arur practition, have increas middlemarch practic in thatdirect. great statesmen err, and why not small medic men? mr.wrench did not neglect send the usual white parcel, which thi timehad black and drastic content. their effect wa not allevi topoor fred, who, howev, unwil as he said to believ that he wa“in for an ill,” rose at hi usual easi hour the next morn andwent down-stair mean to breakfast, but succeed in noth but insit and shiver by the fire. mr. wrench wa again sent for, butwa gone on hi round, and mr. vinci see her darl’s changedlook and gener miseri, began to cry and said she would send for dr.spragu.“oh, nonsens, mother! it’s noth,” said fred, put out hi hotdri hand to her, “i shall soon be all right. i must have taken cold inthat nasti damp ride.”“mamma!” said rosamond, who wa seat near the window (the dine-roomwindow look on that highli respect street call lowick gate),“there is mr. lydgat, stop to speak to some on. if i were you iwould call him in. he ha cure ellen bulstrod. thei sai he cureseveri on.”mr. vinci sprang to the window and open it in an instant, thinkingonli of fred and not of medic etiquett. lydgat wa onli two yardsoff on the other side of some iron palisad, and turn round at thesudden sound of the sash, befor she call to him. in two minut hewa in the room, and rosamond went out, after wait just long enoughto show a pretti anxieti conflict with her sens of what wasbecom.lydgat had to hear a narr in which mr. vinci’s mind insistedwith remark instinct on everi point of minor import, especiallyon what mr. wrench had said and had not said about come again. thatther might be an awkward affair with wrench, lydgat saw at onc; butth case wa seriou enough to make him dismiss that consider: hewa convinc that fred wa in the pink-skin stage of typhoid fever,and that he had taken just the wrong medicin. he must go to bedimmedi, must have a regular nurs, and variou applianc andprecaut must be us, about which lydgat wa particular. poor mr.vinci’s terror at these indic of danger found vent in such wordsa came most easili. she thought it “veri ill usag on the part of mr.wrench, who had attend their hous so mani year in prefer to mr.peacock, though mr. peacock wa equal a friend. why mr. wrench shouldneglect her children more than other, she could not for the life ofher understand. he had not neglect mr. larcher’s when thei had themeasl, nor inde would mr. vinci have wish that he should. and ifanyth should happen—”here poor mr. vinci’s spirit quit broke down, and her niob throatand good-humor face were sadli convuls. thi wa in the hall out offr’s hear, but rosamond had open the draw-room door, and nowcam forward anxious. lydgat apolog for mr. wrench, said thatth symptom yesterdai might have been disguis, and that thi formof fever wa veri equivoc in it begin: he would go immediatelyto the druggist’s and have a prescript made up in order to lose notim, but he would write to mr. wrench and tell him what had been done.“but you must come again—you must go on attend fred. i can’t have myboi left to anybodi who mai come or not. i bear nobodi ill-will, thankgod, and mr. wrench save me in the pleurisi, but he’d better have letm die—if—if—”“i will meet mr. wrench here, then, shall i?” said lydgat, reallybeliev that wrench wa not well prepar to deal wise with a caseof thi kind.“prai make that arrang, mr. lydgat,” said rosamond, come to hermoth’s aid, and support her arm to lead her awai.when mr. vinci came home he wa veri angri with wrench, and did notcar if he never came into hi hous again. lydgat should go on now,whether wrench like it or not. it wa no joke to have fever in thehous. everybodi must be sent to now, not to come to dinner onthursdai. and pritchard needn’t get up ani wine: brandi wa the bestth against infect. “i shall drink brandi,” ad mr. vinci,emphat—as much as to sai, thi wa not an occas for firingwith blank-cartridg. “he’s an uncommonli unfortun lad, is fred.he’d need have some luck by and by to make up for all thi—els i don’tknow who’d have an eldest son.”“don’t sai so, vinci,” said the mother, with a quiver lip, “if youdon’t want him to be taken from me.”“it will worret you to death, luci; _that_ i can see,” said mr. vinci,more mildli. “howev, wrench shall know what i think of the matter.”(what mr. vinci thought confusedli wa, that the fever might somehowhav been hinder if wrench had shown the proper solicitud abouthi—the mayor’s—famili.) “i’m the last man to give in to the cry aboutnew doctor, or new parson either—whether thei’re bulstrod’s men ornot. but wrench shall know what i think, take it as he will.”wrench did not take it at all well. lydgat wa as polit as he couldb in hi offhand wai, but polit in a man who ha place you at adisadvantag is onli an addit exasper, especi if hehappen to have been an object of dislik beforehand. countrypractition us to be an irrit speci, suscept on the pointof honor; and mr. wrench wa on of the most irrit among them. hedid not refus to meet lydgat in the even, but hi temper wassomewhat tri on the occas. he had to hear mr. vinci sai—“oh, mr. wrench, what have i ever done that you should us me so?— togo awai, and never to come again! and my boi might have been stretcheda corps!”mr. vinci, who had been keep up a sharp fire on the enemi infect,and wa a good deal heat in consequ, start up when he heardwrench come in, and went into the hall to let him know what he thought.“i’ll tell you what, wrench, thi is beyond a joke,” said the mayor,who of late had had to rebuk offend with an offici air, and nowbroaden himself by put hi thumb in hi armhol. “to let feverget unawar into a hous like thi. there ar some thing that oughtto be action, and ar not so— that’s my opinion.”but irrat reproach were easier to bear than the sens of beinginstruct, or rather the sens that a younger man, like lydgat,inwardli consid him in need of instruct, for “in point of fact,”mr. wrench afterward said, lydgat parad flighti, foreign notion,which would not wear. he swallow hi ir for the moment, but heafterward wrote to declin further attend in the case. the housemight be a good on, but mr. wrench wa not go to truckl to anybodyon a profession matter. he reflect, with much probabl on hissid, that lydgat would by-and-by be caught trip too, and that hisungentlemanli attempt to discredit the sale of drug by hisprofession brethren, would by-and-by recoil on himself. he threw outbit remark on lydgat’s trick, worthi onli of a quack, to gethimself a factiti reput with credul peopl. that cant aboutcur wa never got up by sound practition.thi wa a point on which lydgat smart as much as wrench coulddesir. to be puf by ignor wa not onli humili, butperil, and not more enviabl than the reput of theweath-prophet. he wa impati of the foolish expect amidstwhich all work must be carri on, and like enough to damag himselfa much as mr. wrench could wish, by an unprofession open.howev, lydgat wa instal as medic attend on the vinci, andth event wa a subject of gener convers in middlemarch. somesaid, that the vinci had behav scandal, that mr. vinci hadthreaten wrench, and that mr. vinci had accus him of poison herson. other were of opinion that mr. lydgat’s pass by wasprovidenti, that he wa wonderfulli clever in fever, and thatbulstrod wa in the right to bring him forward. mani peopl believedthat lydgat’s come to the town at all wa realli due to bulstrod;and mr. taft, who wa alwai count stitch and gather herinform in mislead fragment caught between the row of herknit, had got it into her head that mr. lydgat wa a natur sonof bulstrod’s, a fact which seem to justifi her suspicion ofevangel laymen.she on dai commun thi piec of knowledg to mr. farebroth,who did not fail to tell her son of it, observ—“i should not be surpris at anyth in bulstrod, but i should besorri to think it of mr. lydgat.”“why, mother,” said mr. farebroth, after an explos laugh, “youknow veri well that lydgat is of a good famili in the north. he neverheard of bulstrod befor he came here.”“that is satisfactori so far as mr. lydgat is concern, camden,” saidth old ladi, with an air of precis.—“but as to bulstrod—the reportmai be true of some other son.”chapter xxvii.let the high muse chant love olympian:we ar but mortal, and must sing of man.an emin philosoph among my friend, who can dignifi even your uglyfurnitur by lift it into the seren light of scienc, ha shown methi pregnant littl fact. your pier-glass or extens surfac ofpolish steel made to be rub by a housemaid, will be minut andmultitudin scratch in all direct; but place now against it alight candl as a centr of illumin, and lo! the scratch willseem to arrang themselv in a fine seri of concentr circl roundthat littl sun. it is demonstr that the scratch ar goingeverywher imparti and it is onli your candl which produc theflatt illus of a concentr arrang, it light fall withan exclus optic select. these thing ar a parabl. thescratch ar event, and the candl is the egoism of ani person nowabs—of miss vinci, for exampl. rosamond had a provid of her ownwho had kindli made her more charm than other girl, and who seemedto have arrang fred’s ill and mr. wrench’s mistak in order tobr her and lydgat within effect proxim. it would have been tocontraven these arrang if rosamond had consent to go awai toston court or elsewher, as her parent wish her to do, especiallysinc mr. lydgat thought the precaut needless. therefor, whilemiss morgan and the children were sent awai to a farmhous the morningaft fred’s ill had declar itself, rosamond refus to leavepapa and mamma.poor mamma inde wa an object to touch ani creatur born of woman;and mr. vinci, who dote on hi wife, wa more alarm on her accountthan on fred’s. but for hi insist she would have taken no rest:her bright wa all bedim; unconsci of her costum which hadalwai been so fresh and gai, she wa like a sick bird with languid eyeand plumag ruffl, her sens dull to the sight and sound thatus most to interest her. fred’s delirium, in which he seem to bewand out of her reach, tore her heart. after her first outburstagainst mr. wrench she went about veri quietli: her on low cry wa tolydg. she would follow him out of the room and put her hand on hisarm moan out, “save my boi.” onc she plead, “he ha alwai beengood to me, mr. lydgat: he never had a hard word for hi mother,”—asif poor fred’s suffer were an accus against him. all thedeepest fibr of the mother’s memori were stir, and the young manwhos voic took a gentler tone when he spoke to her, wa on with thebab whom she had love, with a love new to her, befor he wa born.“i have good hope, mr. vinci,” lydgat would sai. “come down with meand let us talk about the food.” in that wai he led her to the parlorwher rosamond wa, and made a chang for her, surpris her intotak some tea or broth which had been prepar for her. there wa aconst understand between him and rosamond on these matter. healmost alwai saw her befor go to the sickroom, and she appeal tohim as to what she could do for mamma. her presenc of mind andadroit in carri out hi hint were admir, and it is notwond that the idea of see rosamond began to mingl itself withhi interest in the case. especi when the critic stage waspass, and he began to feel confid of fred’s recoveri. in the moredoubt time, he had advis call in dr. spragu (who, if he could,would rather have remain neutral on wrench’s account); but after twoconsult, the conduct of the case wa left to lydgat, and therewa everi reason to make him assidu. morn and even he wa atmr. vinci’s, and gradual the visit becam cheer as fred becamesimpli feebl, and lai not onli in need of the utmost pet butconsci of it, so that mr. vinci felt as if, after all, the illnesshad made a festiv for her tender.both father and mother held it an ad reason for good spirit, whenold mr. featherston sent messag by lydgat, sai that fred mustmak hast and get well, as he, peter featherston, could not dowithout him, and miss hi visit sadli. the old man himself wasget bedridden. mr. vinci told these messag to fred when he couldlisten, and he turn toward her hi delic, pinch face, fromwhich all the thick blond hair had been cut awai, and in which the eyesseem to have got larger, yearn for some word about mari—wonderingwhat she felt about hi ill. no word pass hi lip; but “to hearwith ey belong to love’s rare wit,” and the mother in the ful ofher heart not onli divin fred’s long, but felt readi for anysacrific in order to satisfi him.“if i can onli see my boi strong again,” she said, in her love folli;“and who know?—perhap master of stone court! and he can marri anybodyh like then.”“not if thei won’t have me, mother,” said fred. the ill had madehim childish, and tear came as he spoke.“oh, take a bit of jelli, my dear,” said mr. vinci, secretlyincredul of ani such refus.she never left fred’s side when her husband wa not in the hous, andthu rosamond wa in the unusu posit of be much alon. lydgat,natur, never thought of stai long with her, yet it seem thatth brief imperson convers thei had togeth were creat thatpeculiar intimaci which consist in shyness. thei were oblig to lookat each other in speak, and somehow the look could not be carriedthrough as the matter of cours which it realli wa. lydgat began tofeel thi sort of conscious unpleas and on dai look down, oranywher, like an ill-work puppet. but thi turn out badli: thenext dai, rosamond look down, and the consequ wa that when theirey met again, both were more consciou than befor. there wa no helpfor thi in scienc, and as lydgat did not want to flirt, there seemedto be no help for it in folli. it wa therefor a relief when neighborsno longer consid the hous in quarantin, and when the chanc ofse rosamond alon were veri much reduc.but that intimaci of mutual embarrass, in which each feel that theother is feel someth, have onc exist, it effect is not tobe done awai with. talk about the weather and other well-bred topic isapt to seem a hollow devic, and behavior can hardli becom easi unlessit frankli recogn a mutual fascin—which of cours need notmean anyth deep or seriou. thi wa the wai in which rosamond andlydg slid gracefulli into eas, and made their intercours livelyagain. visitor came and went as usual, there wa onc more music inth draw-room, and all the extra hospit of mr. vinci’smayoralti return. lydgat, whenev he could, took hi seat byrosamond’s side, and linger to hear her music, call himself hercapt—mean, all the while, not to be her captiv. thepreposter of the notion that he could at onc set up asatisfactori establish as a marri man wa a suffici guaranteeagainst danger. thi plai at be a littl in love wa agreeabl, anddid not interfer with graver pursuit. flirtat, after all, wa notnecessarili a sing process. rosamond, for her part, had neverenjoi the dai so much in her life befor: she wa sure of beingadmir by some on worth captiv, and she did not distinguishflirt from love, either in herself or in anoth. she seem to besail with a fair wind just whither she would go, and her thoughtswer much occupi with a handsom hous in lowick gate which she hopedwould by-and-by be vacant. she wa quit determin, when she wasmarri, to rid herself adroitli of all the visitor who were notagre to her at her father’s; and she imagin the draw-room inher favorit hous with variou style of furnitur.certainli her thought were much occupi with lydgat himself; heseem to her almost perfect: if he had known hi note so that hisenchant under her music had been less like an emot eleph’s,and if he had been abl to discrimin better the refin of hertast in dress, she could hardli have mention a defici in him.how differ he wa from young plymdal or mr. caiu larcher! thoseyoung men had not a notion of french, and could speak on no subjectwith strike knowledg, except perhap the dye and carri trade,which of cours thei were asham to mention; thei were middlemarchgentri, elat with their silver-head whip and satin stock, butembarrass in their manner, and timidli jocos: even fred wa abovethem, have at least the accent and manner of a univers man.wherea lydgat wa alwai listen to, bore himself with the carelesspolit of consciou superior, and seem to have the rightcloth on by a certain natur affin, without ever have to thinkabout them. rosamond wa proud when he enter the room, and when heapproach her with a distinguish smile, she had a delici sensethat she wa the object of enviabl homag. if lydgat had been awareof all the pride he excit in that delic bosom, he might have beenjust as well pleas as ani other man, even the most dens ignorantof humor patholog or fibrou tissu: he held it on of the prettiestattitud of the feminin mind to ador a man’s pre-emin withouttoo precis a knowledg of what it consist in. but rosamond wa noton of those helpless girl who betrai themselv unawar, and whosebehavior is awkwardli driven by their impuls, instead of beingsteer by wari grace and proprieti. do you imagin that her rapidforecast and rumin concern hous-furnitur and societi wereev discern in her convers, even with her mamma? on thecontrari, she would have express the prettiest surpris anddisapprob if she had heard that anoth young ladi had beendetect in that immodest prematur—inde, would probabl havedisbeliev in it possibl. for rosamond never show anyunbecom knowledg, and wa alwai that combin of correctsenti, music, danc, draw, eleg note-write, privatealbum for extract vers, and perfect blond loveli, which made theirresist woman for the doom man of that date. think no unfairevil of her, prai: she had no wick plot, noth sordid ormercenari; in fact, she never thought of monei except as somethingnecessari which other peopl would alwai provid. she wa not in thehabit of devis falsehood, and if her statement were no direct clewto fact, why, thei were not intend in that light—thei were among hereleg accomplish, intend to pleas. natur had inspir manyart in finish mr. lemon’s favorit pupil, who by gener consent(fred’s except) wa a rare compound of beauti, clever, andami.lydgat found it more and more agreeabl to be with her, and there wasno constraint now, there wa a delight interchang of influenc intheir ey, and what thei said had that superflu of mean forthem, which is observ with some sens of flat by a thirdperson; still thei had no interview or asid from which a thirdperson need have been exclud. in fact, thei flirt; and lydgat wassecur in the belief that thei did noth els. if a man could notlov and be wise, sure he could flirt and be wise at the same time?realli, the men in middlemarch, except mr. farebroth, were greatbor, and lydgat did not care about commerci polit or card:what wa he to do for relax? he wa often invit to thebulstrod’; but the girl there were hardli out of the schoolroom; andmr. bulstrod’s _naiv_ wai of concili pieti and worldli, thenothing of thi life and the desir of cut glass, theconsci at onc of filthi rag and the best damask, wa not asuffici relief from the weight of her husband’s invariableseri. the vinci’ hous, with all it fault, wa the pleasanterbi contrast; besid, it nourish rosamond—sweet to look at as ahalf-open blush-rose, and adorn with accomplish for therefin amus of man.but he made some enemi, other than medic, by hi success with missvinci. on even he came into the draw-room rather late, whensever other visitor were there. the card-tabl had drawn off theelder, and mr. ned plymdal (on of the good match in middlemarch,though not on of it lead mind) wa in _tête-à-tête_ withrosamond. he had brought the last “keepsak,” the gorgeou water-silkpubl which mark modern progress at that time; and heconsid himself veri fortun that he could be the first to lookov it with her, dwell on the ladi and gentlemen with shinycopp-plate cheek and copper-plate smile, and point to comicvers as capit and sentiment stori as interest. rosamond wasgraci, and mr. ned wa satisfi that he had the veri best thing inart and literatur as a medium for “pai address”—the veri thing topleas a nice girl. he had also reason, deep rather than ostens,for be satisfi with hi own appear. to superfici observershi chin had too vanish an aspect, look as if it were beinggradu reabsorb. and it did inde caus him some difficulti aboutth fit of hi satin stock, for which chin were at that time us.“i think the honor mr. s. is someth like you,” said mr. ned. hekept the book open at the bewitch portrait, and look at it ratherlanguishingli.“her back is veri larg; she seem to have sat for that,” saidrosamond, not mean ani satir, but think how red young plymdal’shand were, and wonder why lydgat did not come. she went on withher tat all the while.“i did not sai she wa as beauti as you ar,” said mr. ned,ventur to look from the portrait to it rival.“i suspect you of be an adroit flatter,” said rosamond, feelingsur that she should have to reject thi young gentleman a second time.but now lydgat came in; the book wa close befor he reachedrosamond’s corner, and as he took hi seat with easi confid on theother side of her, young plymdal’s jaw fell like a baromet towardsth cheerless side of chang. rosamond enjoi not onli lydgat’spresenc but it effect: she like to excit jealousi.“what a late comer you ar!” she said, as thei shook hand. “mamma hadgiven you up a littl while ago. how do you find fred?”“as usual; go on well, but slowli. i want him to go awai—to stonecourt, for exampl. but your mamma seem to have some object.”“poor fellow!” said rosamond, prettili. “you will see fred so chang,”she ad, turn to the other suitor; “we have look to mr. lydgatea our guardian angel dure thi ill.”mr. ned smile nervous, while lydgat, draw the “keepsak” towardshim and open it, gave a short scorn laugh and toss up hi chin,as if in wonder at human folli.“what ar you laugh at so profan?” said rosamond, with blandneutr.“i wonder which would turn out to be the silliest—the engrav or thewrit here,” said lydgat, in hi most convinc tone, while heturn over the page quickli, seem to see all through the book inno time, and show hi larg white hand to much advantag, asrosamond thought. “do look at thi bridegroom come out of church: didyou ever see such a ‘sugar invent’—as the elizabethan us tosai? did ani haberdash ever look so smirk? yet i will answer forit the stori make him on of the first gentlemen in the land.”“you ar so sever, i am frighten at you,” said rosamond, keep heramus duli moder. poor young plymdal had linger withadmir over thi veri engrav, and hi spirit wa stir.“there ar a great mani celebr peopl write in the ‘keepsak,’ atal event,” he said, in a tone at onc piqu and timid. “thi is thefirst time i have heard it call silli.”“i think i shall turn round on you and accus you of be a goth,”said rosamond, look at lydgat with a smile. “i suspect you knownoth about ladi blessington and l. e. l.” rosamond herself wa notwithout relish for these writer, but she did not readili commitherself by admir, and wa aliv to the slightest hint thatanyth wa not, accord to lydgat, in the veri highest tast.“but sir walter scott—i suppos mr. lydgat know him,” said youngplymdal, a littl cheer by thi advantag.“oh, i read no literatur now,” said lydgat, shut the book, andpush it awai. “i read so much when i wa a lad, that i suppos itwil last me all my life. i us to know scott’s poem by heart.”“i should like to know when you left off,” said rosamond, “becaus theni might be sure that i knew someth which you did not know.”“mr. lydgat would sai that wa not worth know,” said mr. ned,purpos caustic.“on the contrari,” said lydgat, show no smart; but smile withexasper confid at rosamond. “it would be worth know by thefact that miss vinci could tell it me.”young plymdal soon went to look at the whist-plai, think thatlydg wa on of the most conceit, unpleas fellow it had everbeen hi ill-fortun to meet.“how rash you ar!” said rosamond, inwardli delight. “do you see thatyou have given offenc?”“what! is it mr. plymdal’s book? i am sorri. i didn’t think about it.”“i shall begin to admit what you said of yourself when you first cameher—that you ar a bear, and want teach by the bird.”“well, there is a bird who can teach me what she will. don’t i listento her willingli?”to rosamond it seem as if she and lydgat were as good as engag.that thei were some time to be engag had long been an idea in hermind; and idea, we know, tend to a more solid kind of exist, thenecessari materi be at hand. it is true, lydgat had thecount-idea of remain unengag; but thi wa a mere neg, ashadow cast by other resolv which themselv were capabl ofshrink. circumst wa almost sure to be on the side of rosamond’sidea, which had a shape activ and look through watch blueey, wherea lydgat’s lai blind and unconcern as a jelli-fish whichget melt without know it.that even when he went home, he look at hi phial to see how aprocess of macer wa go on, with undisturb interest; and hewrot out hi daili note with as much precis as usual. the reveriesfrom which it wa difficult for him to detach himself were idealconstruct of someth els than rosamond’s virtu, and theprimit tissu wa still hi fair unknown. moreov, he wa beginningto feel some zest for the grow though half-suppress feud betweenhim and the other medic men, which wa like to becom moremanifest, now that bulstrod’s method of manag the new hospit wasabout to be declar; and there were variou inspirit sign that hisnon-accept by some of peacock’s patient might be counterbalancedbi the impress he had produc in other quarter. onli a few dayslat, when he had happen to overtak rosamond on the lowick road andhad got down from hi hors to walk by her side until he had quiteprotect her from a pass drove, he had been stop by a servant onhorseback with a messag call him in to a hous of some importancewher peacock had never attend; and it wa the second instanc ofthi kind. the servant wa sir jame chettam’s, and the hous waslowick manor.chapter xxviii.1_st gent_. all time ar good to seek your wed home bring a mutual delight.2_d gent_. why, true. the calendar hath not an evil dai for soul made on by love, and even death were sweet, if it came like roll wave while thei two clasp each other, and foresaw no life apart.mr. and mr. casaubon, return from their wed journei, arriv atlowick manor in the middl of januari. a light snow wa fall as theydescend at the door, and in the morn, when dorothea pass fromher dress-room into the blue-green boudoir that we know of, she sawth long avenu of lime lift their trunk from a white earth, andspread white branch against the dun and motionless sky. thedist flat shrank in uniform white and low-hang uniform ofcloud. the veri furnitur in the room seem to have shrunk sinc shesaw it befor: the stag in the tapestri look more like a ghost in hisghostli blue-green world; the volum of polit literatur in thebookcas look more like immov imit of book. the brightfir of dry oak-bough burn on the log seem an incongruousrenew of life and glow—like the figur of dorothea herself as sheenter carri the red-leather case contain the cameo for celia.she wa glow from her morn toilet as onli health youth canglow: there wa gem-like bright on her coil hair and in her hazeley; there wa warm red life in her lip; her throat had a breathingwhit abov the differ white of the fur which itself seem towind about her neck and cling down her blue-grai peliss with atend gather from her own, a sentient commingl innoc whichkept it loveli against the crystallin puriti of the outdoor snow.as she laid the cameo-case on the tabl in the bow-window, sheunconsci kept her hand on them, immedi absorb in lookingout on the still, white enclosur which made her visibl world.mr. casaubon, who had risen earli complain of palpit, wa inth librari give audienc to hi curat mr. tucker. by-and-by celiawould come in her qualiti of bridesmaid as well as sister, and throughth next week there would be wed visit receiv and given; all incontinu of that transit life understood to correspond with theexcit of bridal felic, and keep up the sens of busyineffect, as of a dream which the dreamer begin to suspect. theduti of her marri life, contempl as so great beforehand, seemedto be shrink with the furnitur and the white vapor-walledlandscap. the clear height where she expect to walk in fullcommunion had becom difficult to see even in her imagin; thedelici repos of the soul on a complet superior had been shakeninto uneasi effort and alarm with dim presenti. when would thedai begin of that activ wife devot which wa to strengthen herhusband’s life and exalt her own? never perhap, as she hadpreconceiv them; but somehow—still somehow. in thi solemnli pledgedunion of her life, duti would present itself in some new form ofinspir and give a new mean to wife love.meanwhil there wa the snow and the low arch of dun vapor—there wasth stifl oppress of that gentlewoman’s world, where everythingwa done for her and none ask for her aid—where the sens ofconnect with a manifold pregnant exist had to be kept uppainfulli as an inward vision, instead of come from without in claimsthat would have shape her energi.— “what shall i do?” “whatev youpleas, my dear:” that had been her brief histori sinc she had leftoff learn morn lesson and practis silli rhythm on the hatedpiano. marriag, which wa to bring guidanc into worthi and imperativeoccup, had not yet freed her from the gentlewoman’s oppressiveliberti: it had not even fill her leisur with the rumin joi ofuncheck tender. her bloom full-puls youth stood there in amor imprison which made itself on with the chill, colorless,narrow landscap, with the shrunken furnitur, the never-read book,and the ghostli stag in a pale fantast world that seem to bevanish from the daylight.in the first minut when dorothea look out she felt noth but thedreari oppress; then came a keen remembr, and turn awai fromth window she walk round the room. the idea and hope which wereliv in her mind when she first saw thi room nearli three monthsbefor were present now onli as memori: she judg them as we judgetransi and depart thing. all exist seem to beat with alow puls than her own, and her religi faith wa a solitari cry,the struggl out of a nightmar in which everi object wa wither andshrink awai from her. each rememb thing in the room wasdisench, wa deaden as an unlit transpar, till her wanderinggaz came to the group of miniatur, and there at last she sawsometh which had gather new breath and mean: it wa theminiatur of mr. casaubon’s aunt julia, who had made the unfortunatemarriag—of will ladislaw’s grandmoth. dorothea could fanci that itwa aliv now—the delic woman’s face which yet had a headstronglook, a peculiar difficult to interpret. wa it onli her friend whothought her marriag unfortun? or did she herself find it out to bea mistak, and tast the salt bitter of her tear in the mercifulsil of the night? what breadth of experi dorothea seem tohav pass over sinc she first look at thi miniatur! she felt anew companionship with it, as if it had an ear for her and could seehow she wa look at it. here wa a woman who had known somedifficulti about marriag. nai, the color deepen, the lip and chinseem to get larger, the hair and ey seem to be send out light,the face wa masculin and beam on her with that full gaze whichtel her on whom it fall that she is too interest for theslightest movement of her eyelid to pass unnot and uninterpret.the vivid present came like a pleasant glow to dorothea: she feltherself smile, and turn from the miniatur sat down and look upa if she were again talk to a figur in front of her. but the smiledisappear as she went on medit, and at last she said aloud—“oh, it wa cruel to speak so! how sad—how dread!”she rose quickli and went out of the room, hurri along the corridor,with the irresist impuls to go and see her husband and inquir ifsh could do anyth for him. perhap mr. tucker wa gone and mr.casaubon wa alon in the librari. she felt as if all her morn’sgloom would vanish if she could see her husband glad becaus of herpres.but when she reach the head of the dark oak there wa celia comingup, and below there wa mr. brook, exchang welcom andcongratul with mr. casaubon.“dodo!” said celia, in her quiet staccato; then kiss her sister,whose arm encircl her, and said no more. i think thei both cri alittl in a furtiv manner, while dorothea ran down-stair to greet heruncl.“i need not ask how you ar, my dear,” said mr. brook, after kissingh forehead. “rome ha agre with you, i see—happi, fresco, theantiqu—that sort of thing. well, it’s veri pleasant to have you backagain, and you understand all about art now, eh? but casaubon is alittl pale, i tell him—a littl pale, you know. studi hard in hisholidai is carri it rather too far. i overdid it at on time”—mr.brook still held dorothea’s hand, but had turn hi face to mr.casaubon—“about topographi, ruin, templ—i thought i had a clew, buti saw it would carri me too far, and noth might come of it. you maygo ani length in that sort of thing, and noth mai come of it, youknow.”dorothea’s ey also were turn up to her husband’s face with someanxieti at the idea that those who saw him afresh after absenc mightb awar of sign which she had not notic.“noth to alarm you, my dear,” said mr. brook, observ herexpress. “a littl english beef and mutton will soon make adiffer. it wa all veri well to look pale, sit for the portraitof aquina, you know—we got your letter just in time. but aquina,now—he wa a littl too subtl, wasn’t he? doe anybodi read aquina?”“he is not inde an author adapt to superfici mind,” said mr.casaubon, meet these time question with dignifi patienc.“you would like coffe in your own room, uncl?” said dorothea, comingto the rescu.“ye; and you must go to celia: she ha great new to tell you, youknow. i leav it all to her.”the blue-green boudoir look much more cheer when celia wa seatedther in a peliss exactli like her sister’s, survei the cameo witha placid satisfact, while the convers pass on to othertop.“do you think it nice to go to rome on a wed journei?” said celia,with her readi delic blush which dorothea wa us to on thesmallest occas.“it would not suit all—not you, dear, for exampl,” said dorothea,quietli. no on would ever know what she thought of a wed journeyto rome.“mr. cadwallad sai it is nonsens, peopl go a long journei whenthei ar marri. she sai thei get tire to death of each other, andcan’t quarrel comfort, as thei would at home. and ladi chettam sayssh went to bath.” celia’s color chang again and again—seem“to come and go with tide from the heart,as it a run messeng had been.”it must mean more than celia’s blush usual did.“celia! ha someth happen?” said dorothea, in a tone full ofsisterli feel. “have you realli ani great new to tell me?”“it wa becaus you went awai, dodo. then there wa nobodi but me forsir jame to talk to,” said celia, with a certain roguish in herey.“i understand. it is as i us to hope and believ,” said dorothea,take her sister’s face between her hand, and look at her halfanxi. celia’s marriag seem more seriou than it us to do.“it wa onli three dai ago,” said celia. “and ladi chettam is verykind.”“and you ar veri happi?”“ye. we ar not go to be marri yet. becaus everi thing is to begot readi. and i don’t want to be marri so veri soon, becaus i thinkit is nice to be engag. and we shall be marri all our live after.”“i do believ you could not marri better, kitti. sir jame is a good,honor man,” said dorothea, warmli.“he ha gone on with the cottag, dodo. he will tell you about themwhen he come. shall you be glad to see him?”“of cours i shall. how can you ask me?”“onli i wa afraid you would be get so learn,” said celia,regard mr. casaubon’s learn as a kind of damp which might in duetim satur a neighbor bodi.chapter xxix.i found that no geniu in anoth could pleas me. my unfortunateparadox had entir dri up that sourc of comfort.—goldsmith.on morn, some week after her arriv at lowick, dorothea—but whyalwai dorothea? wa her point of view the onli possibl on withregard to thi marriag? i protest against all our interest, all oureffort at understand be given to the young skin that lookbloom in spite of troubl; for these too will get fade, and willknow the older and more eat grief which we ar help to neglect.in spite of the blink ey and white mole objection to celia,and the want of muscular curv which wa moral pain to sir jame,mr. casaubon had an intens conscious within him, and wasspiritu a-hunger like the rest of us. he had done nothingexcept in marri—noth but what societi sanction, andconsid an occas for wreath and bouquet. it had occur to himthat he must not ani longer defer hi intent of matrimoni, and hehad reflect that in take a wife, a man of good posit shouldexpect and carefulli choos a bloom young ladi—the younger thebett, becaus more educ and submiss—of a rank equal to hisown, of religi principl, virtuou disposit, and goodunderstand. on such a young ladi he would make handsom settlement,and he would neglect no arrang for her happi: in return, heshould receiv famili pleasur and leav behind him that copi ofhimself which seem so urgent requir of a man—to the sonnet ofth sixteenth centuri. time had alter sinc then, and no sonneteerhad insist on mr. casaubon’s leav a copi of himself; moreov, hehad not yet succeed in issu copi of hi mytholog kei; but hehad alwai intend to acquit himself by marriag, and the sens thath wa fast leav the year behind him, that the world wa gettingdimm and that he felt lone, wa a reason to him for lose no moretim in overtak domest delight befor thei too were left behindbi the year.and when he had seen dorothea he believ that he had found even morethan he demand: she might realli be such a helpmat to him as woulden him to dispens with a hire secretari, an aid which mr.casaubon had never yet emploi and had a suspici dread of. (mr.casaubon wa nervous consciou that he wa expect to manifest apow mind.) provid, in it kind, had suppli him with thewif he need. a wife, a modest young ladi, with the purelyappreci, unambiti abil of her sex, is sure to think herhusband’s mind power. whether provid had taken equal care ofmiss brook in present her with mr. casaubon wa an idea which couldhardli occur to him. societi never made the preposter demand that aman should think as much about hi own qualif for make acharm girl happi as he think of her for make himself happi. asif a man could choos not onli hi wife but hi wife’s husband! or asif he were bound to provid charm for hi poster in hi ownperson!— when dorothea accept him with effus, that wa onlynatur; and mr. casaubon believ that hi happi wa go tobegin.he had not had much foretast of happi in hi previou life. toknow intens joi without a strong bodili frame, on must have anenthusiast soul. mr. casaubon had never had a strong bodili frame,and hi soul wa sensit without be enthusiast: it wa toolanguid to thrill out of self-conscious into passion delight; itwent on flutter in the swampi ground where it wa hatch, thinkingof it wing and never fly. hi experi wa of that pitiabl kindwhich shrink from piti, and fear most of all that it should be known:it wa that proud narrow sensit which ha not mass enough tospar for transform into sympathi, and quiver thread-like insmal current of self-preoccup or at best of an egoisticscrupulos. and mr. casaubon had mani scrupl: he wa capabl of asever self-restraint; he wa resolut in be a man of honoraccord to the code; he would be unimpeach by ani recognizedopinion. in conduct these end had been attain; but the difficulti ofmak hi kei to all mytholog unimpeach weigh like lead uponhi mind; and the pamphlet—or “parerga” as he call them—by which hetest hi public and deposit small monument record of hi march,were far from have been seen in all their signific. he suspectedth archdeacon of not have read them; he wa in pain doubt as towhat wa realli thought of them by the lead mind of brasenos, andbitterli convinc that hi old acquaint carp had been the writerof that depreciatori recens which wa kept lock in a small drawerof mr. casaubon’s desk, and also in a dark closet of hi verbal memori.these were heavi impress to struggl against, and brought thatmelancholi embitter which is the consequ of all excessiveclaim: even hi religi faith waver with hi waver trust in hisown authorship, and the consol of the christian hope inimmort seem to lean on the immort of the still unwrittenkei to all mytholog. for my part i am veri sorri for him. it is anuneasi lot at best, to be what we call highli taught and yet not toenjoi: to be present at thi great spectacl of life and never to beliber from a small hungri shiver self—never to be fullypossess by the glori we behold, never to have our consciousnessraptur transform into the vivid of a thought, the ardor of apass, the energi of an action, but alwai to be scholarli anduninspir, ambiti and timid, scrupul and dim-sight. becom adean or even a bishop would make littl differ, i fear, to mr.casaubon’s uneasi. doubtless some ancient greek ha observ thatbehind the big mask and the speak-trumpet, there must alwai be ourpoor littl ey peep as usual and our timor lip more or lessund anxiou control.to thi mental estat map out a quarter of a centuri befor, tosens thu fenc in, mr. casaubon had thought of annexinghappi with a love young bride; but even befor marriag, as wehav seen, he found himself under a new depress in the consciousnessthat the new bliss wa not bliss to him. inclin yearn back toit old, easier custom. and the deeper he went in domest the moredid the sens of acquit himself and act with proprietypredomin over ani other satisfact. marriag, like religion anderudit, nai, like authorship itself, wa fate to becom an outwardrequir, and edward casaubon wa bent on fulfil unimpeachablyal requir. even draw dorothea into us in hi studi,accord to hi own intent befor marriag, wa an effort which hewa alwai tempt to defer, and but for her plead insist itmight never have begun. but she had succeed in make it a matter ofcours that she should take her place at an earli hour in the libraryand have work either of read aloud or copi assign her. the workhad been easier to defin becaus mr. casaubon had adopt an immediateintent: there wa to be a new parergon, a small monograph on somel trace indic concern the egyptian mysteri wherebycertain assert of warburton’s could be correct. refer wereextens even here, but not altogeth shoreless; and sentenc wereactu to be written in the shape wherein thei would be scan bybrasenos and a less formid poster. these minor monumentalproduct were alwai excit to mr. casaubon; digest wa madedifficult by the interfer of citat, or by the rivalri ofdialect phrase ring against each other in hi brain. and fromth first there wa to be a latin dedic about which everyth wasuncertain except that it wa not to be address to carp: it wa apoison regret to mr. casaubon that he had onc address aded to carp in which he had number that member of the animalkingdom among the _viro nullo ævo perituro_, a mistak which wouldinfal lai the dedic open to ridicul in the next ag, andmight even be chuckl over by pike and tench in the present.thu mr. casaubon wa in on of hi busiest epoch, and as i began tosai a littl while ago, dorothea join him earli in the librari whereh had breakfast alon. celia at thi time wa on a second visit tolowick, probabl the last befor her marriag, and wa in thedraw-room expect sir jame.dorothea had learn to read the sign of her husband’s mood, and shesaw that the morn had becom more foggi there dure the last hour.she wa go silent to her desk when he said, in that distant tonewhich impli that he wa discharg a disagre duti—“dorothea, here is a letter for you, which wa enclos in oneaddress to me.”it wa a letter of two page, and she immedi look at thesignatur.“mr. ladislaw! what can he have to sai to me?” she exclaim, in a toneof pleas surpris. “but,” she ad, look at mr. casaubon, “i canimagin what he ha written to you about.”“you can, if you pleas, read the letter,” said mr. casaubon, severelypoint to it with hi pen, and not look at her. “but i mai as wellsai beforehand, that i must declin the propos it contain to pai avisit here. i trust i mai be excus for desir an interv ofcomplet freedom from such distract as have been hithertoinevit, and especi from guest whose desultori vivac makestheir presenc a fatigu.”there had been no clash of temper between dorothea and her husbandsinc that littl explos in rome, which had left such strong tracesin her mind that it had been easier ever sinc to quell emot than toincur the consequ of vent it. but thi ill-temper anticipationthat she could desir visit which might be disagre to herhusband, thi gratuit defenc of himself against selfish complainton her part, wa too sharp a sting to be medit on until after ithad been resent. dorothea had thought that she could have beenpati with john milton, but she had never imagin him behav inthi wai; and for a moment mr. casaubon seem to be stupidlyundiscern and odious unjust. piti, that “new-born babe” which wasbi-and-by to rule mani a storm within her, did not “stride the blast”on thi occas. with her first word, utter in a tone that shookhim, she startl mr. casaubon into look at her, and meet theflash of her ey.“why do you attribut to me a wish for anyth that would annoi you?you speak to me as if i were someth you had to contend against. waitat least till i appear to consult my own pleasur apart from your.”“dorothea, you ar hasti,” answer mr. casaubon, nervous.decidedli, thi woman wa too young to be on the formid level ofwifehood—unless she had been pale and featureless and taken everythingfor grant.“i think it wa you who were first hasti in your fals suppositionsabout my feel,” said dorothea, in the same tone. the fire wa notdissip yet, and she thought it wa ignobl in her husband not toapolog to her.“we will, if you pleas, sai no more on thi subject, dorothea. i haveneith leisur nor energi for thi kind of debat.”here mr. casaubon dip hi pen and made as if he would return to hiswrit, though hi hand trembl so much that the word seem to bewritten in an unknown charact. there ar answer which, in turningawai wrath, onli send it to the other end of the room, and to have adiscuss coolli waiv when you feel that justic is all on your ownsid is even more exasper in marriag than in philosophi.dorothea left ladislaw’s two letter unread on her husband’swrite-tabl and went to her own place, the scorn and indignationwithin her reject the read of these letter, just as we hurl awayani trash toward which we seem to have been suspect of meancupid. she did not in the least divin the subtl sourc of herhusband’s bad temper about these letter: she onli knew that thei hadcaus him to offend her. she began to work at onc, and her hand didnot trembl; on the contrari, in write out the quotat which hadbeen given to her the dai befor, she felt that she wa form herlett beautifulli, and it seem to her that she saw the constructionof the latin she wa copi, and which she wa begin tounderstand, more clearli than usual. in her indign there wa asens of superior, but it went out for the present in firm ofstrok, and did not compress itself into an inward articul voicepronounc the onc “affabl archangel” a poor creatur.there had been thi appar quiet for half an hour, and dorothea hadnot look awai from her own tabl, when she heard the loud bang of abook on the floor, and turn quickli saw mr. casaubon on the librarystep cling forward as if he were in some bodili distress. shestart up and bound toward him in an instant: he wa evid ingreat strait for breath. jump on a stool she got close to hi elbowand said with her whole soul melt into tender alarm—“can you lean on me, dear?”he wa still for two or three minut, which seem endless to her,unabl to speak or move, gasp for breath. when at last he descendedth three step and fell backward in the larg chair which dorothea haddrawn close to the foot of the ladder, he no longer gasp but seemedhelpless and about to faint. dorothea rang the bell violent, andpres mr. casaubon wa help to the couch: he did not faint, andwa gradual reviv, when sir jame chettam came in, have been metin the hall with the new that mr. casaubon had “had a fit in thelibrari.”“good god! thi is just what might have been expect,” wa hisimmedi thought. if hi prophet soul had been urg toparticular, it seem to him that “fit” would have been thedefinit express alight upon. he ask hi inform, the butler,whether the doctor had been sent for. the butler never knew hi masterto want the doctor befor; but would it not be right to send for aphysician?when sir jame enter the librari, howev, mr. casaubon could makesom sign of hi usual polit, and dorothea, who in the reactionfrom her first terror had been kneel and sob by hi side nowros and herself propos that some on should ride off for a medicalman.“i recommend you to send for lydgat,” said sir jame. “my mother hascal him in, and she ha found him uncommonli clever. she ha had apoor opinion of the physician sinc my father’s death.”dorothea appeal to her husband, and he made a silent sign ofapprov. so mr. lydgat wa sent for and he came wonderfulli soon, forth messeng, who wa sir jame chettam’s man and knew mr. lydgat,met him lead hi hors along the lowick road and give hi arm tomiss vinci.celia, in the draw-room, had known noth of the troubl till sirjam told her of it. after dorothea’s account, he no longer consideredth ill a fit, but still someth “of that natur.”“poor dear dodo—how dread!” said celia, feel as much griev asher own perfect happi would allow. her littl hand were clasp,and enclos by sir jame’s as a bud is enfold by a liber calyx.“it is veri shock that mr. casaubon should be ill; but i never didlik him. and i think he is not half fond enough of dorothea; and heought to be, for i am sure no on els would have had him—do you thinkthei would?”“i alwai thought it a horribl sacrific of your sister,” said sirjam.“ye. but poor dodo never did do what other peopl do, and i think shenev will.”“she is a nobl creatur,” said the loyal-heart sir jame. he hadjust had a fresh impress of thi kind, as he had seen dorotheastretch her tender arm under her husband’s neck and look at himwith unspeak sorrow. he did not know how much penit there wasin the sorrow.“ye,” said celia, think it wa veri well for sir jame to sai so,but _he_ would not have been comfort with dodo. “shall i go to her?could i help her, do you think?”“i think it would be well for you just to go and see her befor lydgatecom,” said sir jame, magnanim. “onli don’t stai long.”while celia wa gone he walk up and down rememb what he hadorigin felt about dorothea’s engag, and feel a reviv ofhi disgust at mr. brook’s indiffer. if cadwallad—if everi oneels had regard the affair as he, sir jame, had done, the marriagemight have been hinder. it wa wick to let a young girl blindlydecid her fate in that wai, without ani effort to save her. sir jameshad long ceas to have ani regret on hi own account: hi heart wassatisfi with hi engag to celia. but he had a chivalr natur(wa not the disinterest servic of woman among the ideal glori ofold chivalri?): hi disregard love had not turn to bitter; itsdeath had made sweet odor—float memori that clung with aconsecr effect to dorothea. he could remain her brotherli friend,interpret her action with gener trust.chapter xxx.qui veut délasser hor de propo, lass.—pascal.mr. casaubon had no second attack of equal sever with the first, andin a few dai began to recov hi usual condit. but lydgat seemedto think the case worth a great deal of attent. he not onli us hisstethoscop (which had not becom a matter of cours in practic atthat time), but sat quietli by hi patient and watch him. to mr.casaubon’s question about himself, he repli that the sourc of theill wa the common error of intellectu men—a too eager andmonoton applic: the remedi wa, to be satisfi with moderatework, and to seek varieti of relax. mr. brook, who sat by on oneoccas, suggest that mr. casaubon should go fish, as cadwalladerdid, and have a turn-room, make toi, tabl-leg, and that kind ofth.“in short, you recommend me to anticip the arriv of my secondchildhood,” said poor mr. casaubon, with some bitter. “theseth,” he ad, look at lydgat, “would be to me such relaxationa tow-pick is to prison in a hous of correct.”“i confess,” said lydgat, smile, “amus is rather anunsatisfactori prescript. it is someth like tell peopl tokeep up their spirit. perhap i had better sai, that you must submitto be mildli bore rather than to go on work.”“ye, ye,” said mr. brook. “get dorothea to plai backgammon with youin the even. and shuttlecock, now—i don’t know a finer game thanshuttlecock for the daytim. i rememb it all the fashion. to be sure,your ey might not stand that, casaubon. but you must unbend, youknow. why, you might take to some light studi: concholog, now: ialwai think that must be a light studi. or get dorothea to read youlight thing, smollett—‘roderick random,’ ‘humphrei clinker:’ thei area littl broad, but she mai read anyth now she’s marri, you know.i rememb thei made me laugh uncommonli—there’s a droll bit about apostilion’s breech. we have no such humor now. i have gone throughal these thing, but thei might be rather new to you.”“as new as eat thistl,” would have been an answer to repres mr.casaubon’s feel. but he onli bow resignedli, with due respect tohi wife’s uncl, and observ that doubtless the work he mentionedhad “serv as a resourc to a certain order of mind.”“you see,” said the abl magistr to lydgat, when thei were outsideth door, “casaubon ha been a littl narrow: it leav him rather at aloss when you forbid him hi particular work, which i believ issometh veri deep inde—in the line of research, you know. i wouldnev give wai to that; i wa alwai versatil. but a clergyman is tieda littl tight. if thei would make him a bishop, now!—he did a verygood pamphlet for peel. he would have more movement then, more show; hemight get a littl flesh. but i recommend you to talk to mr. casaubon.she is clever enough for anyth, is my niec. tell her, her husbandw liveli, divers: put her on amus tactic.”without mr. brook’s advic, lydgat had determin on speak todorothea. she had not been present while her uncl wa throw out hispleas suggest as to the mode in which life at lowick might beenliven, but she wa usual by her husband’s side, and theunaffect sign of intens anxieti in her face and voic aboutwhatev touch hi mind or health, made a drama which lydgat wasinclin to watch. he said to himself that he wa onli do right intel her the truth about her husband’s probabl futur, but hecertainli thought also that it would be interest to talkconfidenti with her. a medic man like to make psychologicalobserv, and sometim in the pursuit of such studi is tooeasili tempt into moment propheci which life and death easili setat nought. lydgat had often been satir on thi gratuitouspredict, and he meant now to be guard.he ask for mr. casaubon, but be told that she wa out walk, hewa go awai, when dorothea and celia appear, both glow fromtheir struggl with the march wind. when lydgat beg to speak withher alon, dorothea open the librari door which happen to be thenearest, think of noth at the moment but what he might have tosai about mr. casaubon. it wa the first time she had enter thi roomsinc her husband had been taken ill, and the servant had chosen not toopen the shutter. but there wa light enough to read by from thenarrow upper pane of the window.“you will not mind thi sombr light,” said dorothea, stand in themiddl of the room. “sinc you forbad book, the librari ha been outof the question. but mr. casaubon will soon be here again, i hope. ish not make progress?”“ye, much more rapid progress than i at first expect. inde, he isalreadi nearli in hi usual state of health.”“you do not fear that the ill will return?” said dorothea, whosequick ear had detect some signific in lydgat’s tone.“such case ar peculiarli difficult to pronounc upon,” said lydgat.“the onli point on which i can be confid is that it will bedesir to be veri watch on mr. casaubon’s account, lest he shouldin ani wai strain hi nervou power.”“i beseech you to speak quit plainli,” said dorothea, in an implorington. “i cannot bear to think that there might be someth which i didnot know, and which, if i had known it, would have made me actdiffer.” the word came out like a cry: it wa evid that theywer the voic of some mental experi which lai not veri far off.“sit down,” she ad, place herself on the nearest chair, andthrow off her bonnet and glove, with an instinct discard ofform where a great question of destini wa concern.“what you sai now justifi my own view,” said lydgat. “i think it ison’s function as a medic man to hinder regret of that sort as fara possibl. but i beg you to observ that mr. casaubon’s case isprecis of the kind in which the issu is most difficult to pronounceupon. he mai possibl live for fifteen year or more, without muchwors health than he ha had hitherto.”dorothea had turn veri pale, and when lydgat paus she said in alow voic, “you mean if we ar veri care.”“ye—care against mental agit of all kind, and againstexcess applic.”“he would be miser, if he had to give up hi work,” said dorothea,with a quick previs of that wretched.“i am awar of that. the onli cours is to try by all mean, direct andindirect, to moder and vari hi occup. with a happyconcurr of circumst, there is, as i said, no immedi dangerfrom that affect of the heart, which i believ to have been thecaus of hi late attack. on the other hand, it is possibl that thediseas mai develop itself more rapidli: it is on of those case inwhich death is sometim sudden. noth should be neglect whichmight be affect by such an issu.”there wa silenc for a few moment, while dorothea sat as if she hadbeen turn to marbl, though the life within her wa so intens thather mind had never befor swept in brief time over an equal rang ofscen and motiv.“help me, prai,” she said, at last, in the same low voic as befor.“tell me what i can do.”“what do you think of foreign travel? you have been late in rome, ithink.”the memori which made thi resourc utterli hopeless were a newcurr that shook dorothea out of her pallid immobl.“oh, that would not do—that would be wors than anyth,” she saidwith a more childlik despond, while the tear roll down.“noth will be of ani us that he doe not enjoi.”“i wish that i could have spare you thi pain,” said lydgat, deeplytouch, yet wonder about her marriag. women just like dorothea hadnot enter into hi tradit.“it wa right of you to tell me. i thank you for tell me the truth.”“i wish you to understand that i shall not sai anyth to enlightenmr. casaubon himself. i think it desir for him to know noth morethan that he must not overwork himself, and must observ certain rule.anxieti of ani kind would be precis the most unfavor conditionfor him.”lydgat rose, and dorothea mechan rose at the same time,unclasp her cloak and throw it off as if it stifl her. he wasbow and quit her, when an impuls which if she had been alonewould have turn into a prayer, made her sai with a sob in her voic—“oh, you ar a wise man, ar you not? you know all about life anddeath. advis me. think what i can do. he ha been labor all hislif and look forward. he mind about noth els.— and i mindabout noth els—”for year after lydgat rememb the impress produc in him bythi involuntari appeal—thi cry from soul to soul, without otherconsci than their move with kindr natur in the sameembroil medium, the same troublou fitfulli illumin life. butwhat could he sai now except that he should see mr. casaubon againto-morrow?when he wa gone, dorothea’s tear gush forth, and reliev herstifl oppress. then she dri her ey, remind that herdistress must not be betrai to her husband; and look round the roomthink that she must order the servant to attend to it as usual,sinc mr. casaubon might now at ani moment wish to enter. on hiswrit-tabl there were letter which had lain untouch sinc themorn when he wa taken ill, and among them, as dorothea wellrememb, there were young ladislaw’s letter, the on address toher still unopen. the associ of these letter had been made themor pain by that sudden attack of ill which she felt that theagit caus by her anger might have help to bring on: it wouldb time enough to read them when thei were again thrust upon her, andsh had had no inclin to fetch them from the librari. but now itoccur to her that thei should be put out of her husband’s sight:whatev might have been the sourc of hi annoy about them, hemust, if possibl, not be annoi again; and she ran her ey firstov the letter address to him to assur herself whether or not itwould be necessari to write in order to hinder the offens visit.will wrote from rome, and began by sai that hi oblig to mr.casaubon were too deep for all thank not to seem impertin. it wasplain that if he were not grate, he must be the poorest-spiritedrasc who had ever found a gener friend. to expand in wordi thankswould be like sai, “i am honest.” but will had come to perceiv thathi defect—defect which mr. casaubon had himself often pointedto—need for their correct that more strenuou posit which hisrel’s generos had hitherto prevent from be inevit. hetrust that he should make the best return, if return were possibl,by show the effect of the educ for which he wasindebt, and by ceas in futur to need ani divers towardshimself of fund on which other might have a better claim. he wascom to england, to try hi fortun, as mani other young men wereoblig to do whose onli capit wa in their brain. hi friendnaumann had desir him to take charg of the “disput”—the picturepaint for mr. casaubon, with whose permiss, and mr. casaubon’s,will would convei it to lowick in person. a letter address to thepost restant in pari within the fortnight would hinder him, ifnecessari, from arriv at an inconveni moment. he enclos alett to mr. casaubon in which he continu a discuss about art,begun with her in rome.open her own letter dorothea saw that it wa a live continuationof hi remonstr with her fanat sympathi and her want of sturdyneutr delight in thing as thei were—an outpour of hi youngvivac which it wa imposs to read just now. she had immediatelyto consid what wa to be done about the other letter: there wa stilltim perhap to prevent will from come to lowick. dorothea end bygiv the letter to her uncl, who wa still in the hous, and begginghim to let will know that mr. casaubon had been ill, and that hishealth would not allow the recept of ani visitor.no on more readi than mr. brook to write a letter: hi onlydifficulti wa to write a short on, and hi idea in thi caseexpand over the three larg page and the inward fold. he hadsimpli said to dorothea—“to be sure, i will write, my dear. he’s a veri clever youngfellow—thi young ladislaw—i dare sai will be a rise young man. it’sa good letter—mark hi sens of thing, you know. howev, i will tellhim about casaubon.”but the end of mr. brook’s pen wa a think organ, evolvingsent, especi of a benevol kind, befor the rest of hi mindcould well overtak them. it express regret and propos remedi,which, when mr. brook read them, seem felicitouslyword—surprisingli the right thing, and determin a sequel which hehad never befor thought of. in thi case, hi pen found it such a pityyoung ladislaw should not have come into the neighborhood just at thattim, in order that mr. brook might make hi acquaint more fulli,and that thei might go over the long-neglect italian drawingstogeth—it also felt such an interest in a young man who wa startingin life with a stock of idea—that by the end of the second page it hadpersuad mr. brook to invit young ladislaw, sinc he could not bereceiv at lowick, to come to tipton grang. why not? thei could finda great mani thing to do togeth, and thi wa a period of peculiargrowth—the polit horizon wa expand, and—in short, mr. brook’spen went off into a littl speech which it had late report for thatimperfectli edit organ the “middlemarch pioneer.” while mr. brookewa seal thi letter, he felt elat with an influx of dimproject:—a young man capabl of put idea into form, the “pioneer”purchas to clear the pathwai for a new candid, documentsutil—who knew what might come of it all? sinc celia wa go tomarri immedi, it would be veri pleasant to have a young fellow attabl with him, at least for a time.but he went awai without tell dorothea what he had put into thelett, for she wa engag with her husband, and—in fact, these thingswer of no import to her.chapter xxxi.how will you know the pitch of that great belltoo larg for you to stir? let but a fluteplai ’neath the fine-mix metal: listen closetil the right note flow forth, a silveri rill:then shall the huge bell trembl—then the masswith myriad wave concurr shall respondin low soft unison.lydgat that even spoke to miss vinci of mr. casaubon, and laidsom emphasi on the strong feel she appear to have for thatform studiou man thirti year older than herself.“of cours she is devot to her husband,” said rosamond, impli anot of necessari sequenc which the scientif man regard as theprettiest possibl for a woman; but she wa think at the same timethat it wa not so veri melancholi to be mistress of lowick manor witha husband like to die soon. “do you think her veri handsom?”“she certainli is handsom, but i have not thought about it,” saidlydg.“i suppos it would be unprofession,” said rosamond, dimpl. “buthow your practic is spread! you were call in befor to thechettam, i think; and now, the casaubon.”“ye,” said lydgat, in a tone of compulsori admiss. “but i don’trealli like attend such peopl so well as the poor. the case aremor monoton, and on ha to go through more fuss and listen moredeferenti to nonsens.”“not more than in middlemarch,” said rosamond. “and at least you gothrough wide corridor and have the scent of rose-leav everywher.”“that is true, mademoisel de montmor,” said lydgat, just bendinghi head to the tabl and lift with hi fourth finger her delicatehandkerchief which lai at the mouth of her reticul, as if to enjoi itsscent, while he look at her with a smile.but thi agreeabl holidai freedom with which lydgat hover about theflow of middlemarch, could not continu indefinit. it wa not moreposs to find social isol in that town than elsewher, and twopeopl persist flirt could by no mean escap from “the variousentangl, weight, blow, clash, motion, by which thingssever go on.” whatev miss vinci did must be remark, and she wasperhap the more conspicu to admir and critic becaus just nowmr. vinci, after some struggl, had gone with fred to stai a littlewhil at stone court, there be no other wai of at onc gratifyingold featherston and keep watch against mari garth, who appear aless toler daughter-in-law in proport as fred’s illnessdisappear.aunt bulstrod, for exampl, came a littl often into lowick gate tose rosamond, now she wa alon. for mr. bulstrod had a true sisterlyfeel for her brother; alwai think that he might have marriedbett, but wish well to the children. now mr. bulstrod had along-stand intimaci with mr. plymdal. thei had nearli the sameprefer in silk, pattern for undercloth, china-ware, andclergymen; thei confid their littl troubl of health and householdmanag to each other, and variou littl point of superior onmr. bulstrod’s side, name, more decid serious, moreadmir for mind, and a hous outsid the town, sometim serv togiv color to their convers without divid them—well-meaningwomen both, know veri littl of their own motiv.mr. bulstrod, pai a morn visit to mr. plymdal, happen tosai that she could not stai longer, becaus she wa go to see poorrosamond.“why do you sai ‘poor rosamond’?” said mr. plymdal, a round-eyedsharp littl woman, like a tame falcon.“she is so pretti, and ha been brought up in such thoughtless. themoth, you know, had alwai that leviti about her, which make meanxiou for the children.”“well, harriet, if i am to speak my mind,” said mr. plymdal, withemphasi, “i must sai, anybodi would suppos you and mr. bulstrodewould be delight with what ha happen, for you have done everythingto put mr. lydgat forward.”“selina, what do you mean?” said mr. bulstrod, in genuin surpris.“not but what i am truli thank for ned’s sake,” said mr. plymdal.“he could certainli better afford to keep such a wife than some peoplecan; but i should wish him to look elsewher. still a mother hasanxieti, and some young men would take to a bad life in consequ.besid, if i wa oblig to speak, i should sai i wa not fond ofstrang come into a town.”“i don’t know, selina,” said mr. bulstrod, with a littl emphasi inher turn. “mr. bulstrod wa a stranger here at on time. abraham andmos were stranger in the land, and we ar told to entertainstrang. and especi,” she ad, after a slight paus, “when theyar unexception.”“i wa not speak in a religi sens, harriet. i spoke as amoth.”“selina, i am sure you have never heard me sai anyth against a nieceof mine marri your son.”“oh, it is pride in miss vinci—i am sure it is noth els,” said mr.plymdal, who had never befor given all her confid to “harriet” onthi subject. “no young man in middlemarch wa good enough for her: ihav heard her mother sai as much. that is not a christian spirit, ithink. but now, from all i hear, she ha found a man as proud asherself.”“you don’t mean that there is anyth between rosamond and mr.lydgat?” said mr. bulstrod, rather mortifi at find out her ownignor.“is it possibl you don’t know, harriet?”“oh, i go about so littl; and i am not fond of gossip; i realli neverhear ani. you see so mani peopl that i don’t see. your circl israth differ from our.”“well, but your own niec and mr. bulstrod’s great favorit—and yourstoo, i am sure, harriet! i thought, at on time, you meant him forkat, when she is a littl older.”“i don’t believ there can be anyth seriou at present,” said mr.bulstrod. “my brother would certainli have told me.”“well, peopl have differ wai, but i understand that nobodi can seemiss vinci and mr. lydgat togeth without take them to be engag.howev, it is not my busi. shall i put up the pattern of mitten?”after thi mr. bulstrod drove to her niec with a mind newlyweight. she wa herself handsom dress, but she notic with alittl more regret than usual that rosamond, who wa just come in andmet her in walk-dress, wa almost as expens equip. mr.bulstrod wa a feminin smaller edit of her brother, and had noneof her husband’s low-tone pallor. she had a good honest glanc andus no circumlocut.“you ar alon, i see, my dear,” she said, as thei enter thedraw-room togeth, look round grave. rosamond felt sure thather aunt had someth particular to sai, and thei sat down near eachoth. nevertheless, the quill insid rosamond’s bonnet wa socharm that it wa imposs not to desir the same kind of thingfor kate, and mr. bulstrod’s ey, which were rather fine, rolledround that ampl quill circuit, while she spoke.“i have just heard someth about you that ha surpris me veri much,rosamond.”“what is that, aunt?” rosamond’s ey also were roam over her aunt’slarg embroid collar.“i can hardli believ it—that you should be engag without my knowingit—without your father’s tell me.” here mr. bulstrod’s eyesfin rest on rosamond’s, who blush deepli, and said—“i am not engag, aunt.”“how is it that everi on sai so, then—that it is the town’s talk?”“the town’s talk is of veri littl consequ, i think,” saidrosamond, inwardli gratifi.“oh, my dear, be more thought; don’t despis your neighbor so.rememb you ar turn twenti-two now, and you will have no fortun:your father, i am sure, will not be abl to spare you anyth. mr.lydgat is veri intellectu and clever; i know there is an attractionin that. i like talk to such men myself; and your uncl find himveri us. but the profess is a poor on here. to be sure, thislif is not everyth; but it is seldom a medic man ha truereligi view—there is too much pride of intellect. and you ar notfit to marri a poor man.“mr. lydgat is not a poor man, aunt. he ha veri high connect.”“he told me himself he wa poor.”“that is becaus he is us to peopl who have a high style of live.”“my dear rosamond, _you_ must not think of live in high style.”rosamond look down and plai with her reticul. she wa not a fieryyoung ladi and had no sharp answer, but she meant to live as shepleas.“then it is realli true?” said mr. bulstrod, look veri earnestlyat her niec. “you ar think of mr. lydgat—there is someunderstand between you, though your father doesn’t know. be open, mydear rosamond: mr. lydgat ha realli made you an offer?”poor rosamond’s feel were veri unpleas. she had been quit easya to lydgat’s feel and intent, but now when her aunt put thisquest she did not like be unabl to sai ye. her pride wa hurt,but her habitu control of manner help her.“prai excus me, aunt. i would rather not speak on the subject.”“you would not give your heart to a man without a decid prospect, itrust, my dear. and think of the two excel offer i know of thatyou have refus!—and on still within your reach, if you will notthrow it awai. i knew a veri great beauti who marri badli at last, bydo so. mr. ned plymdal is a nice young man—some might thinkgood-look; and an onli son; and a larg busi of that kind isbett than a profess. not that marri is everyth. i would havey seek first the kingdom of god. but a girl should keep her heartwithin her own power.”“i should never give it to mr. ned plymdal, if it were. i have alreadyrefus him. if i love, i should love at onc and without chang,”said rosamond, with a great sens of be a romant heroin, andplai the part prettili.“i see how it is, my dear,” said mr. bulstrod, in a melancholi voic,rise to go. “you have allow your affect to be engag withoutreturn.”“no, inde, aunt,” said rosamond, with emphasi.“then you ar quit confid that mr. lydgat ha a seriou attachmentto you?”rosamond’s cheek by thi time were persist burn, and she feltmuch mortif. she chose to be silent, and her aunt went awai allth more convinc.mr. bulstrod in thing worldli and indiffer wa dispos to do whathi wife bade him, and she now, without tell her reason, desiredhim on the next opportun to find out in convers with mr.lydgat whether he had ani intent of marri soon. the result wa adecid neg. mr. bulstrod, on be cross-question, show thatlydg had spoken as no man would who had ani attach that couldissu in matrimoni. mr. bulstrod now felt that she had a seriou dutybefor her, and she soon manag to arrang a _tête-à-tête_ withlydg, in which she pass from inquiri about fred vinci’s health,and express of her sincer anxieti for her brother’s larg famili,to gener remark on the danger which lai befor young peopl withregard to their settlement in life. young men were often wild anddisappoint, make littl return for the monei spent on them, and agirl wa expos to mani circumst which might interfer with herprospect.“especi when she ha great attract, and her parent see muchcompani,” said mr. bulstrod. “gentlemen pai her attent, andengross her all to themselv, for the mere pleasur of the moment, andthat drive off other. i think it is a heavi respons, mr.lydgat, to interfer with the prospect of ani girl.” here mr.bulstrod fix her ey on him, with an unmistak purpos ofwarn, if not of rebuk.“clearli,” said lydgat, look at her—perhap even stare a littlein return. “on the other hand, a man must be a great coxcomb to goabout with a notion that he must not pai attent to a young ladi lestsh should fall in love with him, or lest other should think shemust.”“oh, mr. lydgat, you know well what your advantag ar. you know thatour young men here cannot cope with you. where you frequent a hous itmai milit veri much against a girl’s make a desir settlementin life, and prevent her from accept offer even if thei ar made.”lydgat wa less flatter by hi advantag over the middlemarchorlando than he wa annoi by the percept of mr. bulstrod’smean. she felt that she had spoken as impress as it wasnecessari to do, and that in us the superior word “milit” she hadthrown a nobl draperi over a mass of particular which were stillevid enough.lydgat wa fume a littl, push hi hair back with on hand, feltcuri in hi waistcoat-pocket with the other, and then stoop tobeckon the tini black spaniel, which had the insight to declin hishollow caress. it would not have been decent to go awai, becaus hehad been dine with other guest, and had just taken tea. but mr.bulstrod, have no doubt that she had been understood, turn theconvers.solomon’s proverb, i think, have omit to sai, that as the sorepal findeth grit, so an uneasi conscious heareth innuendo. thenext dai mr. farebroth, part from lydgat in the street, supposedthat thei should meet at vinci’s in the even. lydgat answeredcurtli, no—he had work to do—he must give up go out in the even.“what! you ar go to get lash to the mast, eh, and ar stoppingyour ear?” said the vicar. “well, if you don’t mean to be won by thesiren, you ar right to take precaut in time.”a few dai befor, lydgat would have taken no notic of these word asanyth more than the vicar’s usual wai of put thing. thei seemednow to convei an innuendo which confirm the impress that he hadbeen make a fool of himself and behav so as to be misunderstood:not, he believ, by rosamond herself; she, he felt sure, tookeveryth as lightli as he intend it. she had an exquisit tact andinsight in relat to all point of manner; but the peopl she livedamong were blunder and busybodi. howev, the mistak should go nofarth. he resolv—and kept hi resolut—that he would not go tomr. vinci’s except on busi.rosamond becam veri unhappi. the uneasi first stir by heraunt’s question grew and grew till at the end of ten dai that she hadnot seen lydgat, it grew into terror at the blank that might possiblycom—into forebod of that readi, fatal spong which so cheapli wipesout the hope of mortal. the world would have a new dreari forher, as a wilder that a magician’s spell had turn for a littlewhil into a garden. she felt that she wa begin to know the pangof disappoint love, and that no other man could be the occas ofsuch delight aerial build as she had been enjoi for the lastsix month. poor rosamond lost her appetit and felt as forlorn asariadn—as a charm stage ariadn left behind with all her box fullof costum and no hope of a coach.there ar mani wonder mixtur in the world which ar all alikecal love, and claim the privileg of a sublim rage which is anapolog for everyth (in literatur and the drama). happili rosamonddid not think of commit ani desper act: she plait her fairhair as beautifulli as usual, and kept herself proudli calm. her mostcheer supposit wa that her aunt bulstrod had interf in somewai to hinder lydgat’s visit: everyth wa better than aspontan indiffer in him. ani on who imagin ten dai tooshort a time—not for fall into lean, light, or othermeasur effect of passion, but—for the whole spiritu circuit ofalarm conjectur and disappoint, is ignor of what can go on inth eleg leisur of a young ladi’s mind.on the eleventh dai, howev, lydgat when leav stone court wasrequest by mr. vinci to let her husband know that there wa a markedchang in mr. featherston’s health, and that she wish him to come toston court on that dai. now lydgat might have call at thewarehous, or might have written a messag on a leaf of hi pocket-bookand left it at the door. yet these simpl devic appar did notoccur to him, from which we mai conclud that he had no strongobject to call at the hous at an hour when mr. vinci wa not athom, and leav the messag with miss vinci. a man mai, from variousmot, declin to give hi compani, but perhap not even a sage wouldb gratifi that nobodi miss him. it would be a grace, easi wayof piec on the new habit to the old, to have a few play wordswith rosamond about hi resist to dissip, and hi firm resolveto take long fast even from sweet sound. it must be confess, also,that momentari specul as to all the possibl ground for mr.bulstrod’s hint had manag to get woven like slight cling hairsinto the more substanti web of hi thought.miss vinci wa alon, and blush so deepli when lydgat came in thath felt a correspond embarrass, and instead of ani play,he began at onc to speak of hi reason for call, and to beg her,almost formal, to deliv the messag to her father. rosamond, who atth first moment felt as if her happi were return, wa keenlyhurt by lydgat’s manner; her blush had depart, and she assentedcoldli, without ad an unnecessari word, some trivial chain-workwhich she had in her hand enabl her to avoid look at lydgatehigh than hi chin. in all failur, the begin is certainli thehalf of the whole. after sit two long moment while he move hiswhip and could sai noth, lydgat rose to go, and rosamond, madenerv by her struggl between mortif and the wish not tobetrai it, drop her chain as if startl, and rose too,mechan. lydgat instantan stoop to pick up the chain.when he rose he wa veri near to a love littl face set on a fairlong neck which he had been us to see turn about under the mostperfect manag of self-content grace. but as he rais hi eyesnow he saw a certain helpless quiver which touch him quit newli,and made him look at rosamond with a question flash. at thi momentsh wa as natur as she had ever been when she wa five year old:she felt that her tear had risen, and it wa no us to try to doanyth els than let them stai like water on a blue flower or letthem fall over her cheek, even as thei would.that moment of natur wa the crystal feather-touch: itshook flirtat into love. rememb that the ambiti man who waslook at those forget-me-not under the water wa veri warm-heartedand rash. he did not know where the chain went; an idea had thrilledthrough the recess within him which had a miracul effect inrais the power of passion love ly buri there in no sealedsepulchr, but under the lightest, easili pierc mould. hi word werequit abrupt and awkward; but the tone made them sound like an ardent,appeal avow.“what is the matter? you ar distress. tell me, prai.”rosamond had never been spoken to in such tone befor. i am not surethat she knew what the word were: but she look at lydgat and thetear fell over her cheek. there could have been no more completeansw than that silenc, and lydgat, forget everyth els,complet master by the outrush of tender at the sudden beliefthat thi sweet young creatur depend on him for her joi, actuallyput hi arm round her, fold her gentli and protectingli—he wa usedto be gentl with the weak and suffer—and kiss each of the twolarg tear. thi wa a strang wai of arriv at an understand,but it wa a short wai. rosamond wa not angri, but she move backwarda littl in timid happi, and lydgat could now sit near her andspeak less incomplet. rosamond had to make her littl confess,and he pour out word of gratitud and tender with impulsivelavish. in half an hour he left the hous an engag man, whosesoul wa not hi own, but the woman’s to whom he had bound himself.he came again in the even to speak with mr. vinci, who, justreturn from stone court, wa feel sure that it would not be longbefor he heard of mr. featherston’s demis. the felicit word“demis,” which had season occur to him, had rais hi spiritseven abov their usual even pitch. the right word is alwai a power,and commun it definit to our action. consid as ademis, old featherston’s death assum a mere legal aspect, so thatmr. vinci could tap hi snuff-box over it and be jovial, without evenan intermitt affect of solemn; and mr. vinci hate bothsolemn and affect. who wa ever aw struck about a testat, orsang a hymn on the titl to real properti? mr. vinci wa inclin totak a jovial view of all thing that even: he even observ tolydg that fred had got the famili constitut after all, and wouldsoon be as fine a fellow as ever again; and when hi approb ofrosamond’s engag wa ask for, he gave it with astonishingfacil, pass at onc to gener remark on the desir ofmatrimoni for young men and maiden, and appar deduc from thewhol the appropri of a littl more punch.chapter xxxii.thei’ll take suggest as a cat lap milk.—shakespear: _tempest_.the triumphant confid of the mayor found on mr. featherston’sinsist demand that fred and hi mother should not leav him, wa afeebl emot compar with all that wa agit the breast of theold man’s blood-relat, who natur manifest more their sens ofth famili tie and were more visibl numer now that he had becomebedridden. natur: for when “poor peter” had occupi hi arm-chairin the wainscot parlor, no assidu beetl for whom the cookprepar boil water could have been less welcom on a hearth whichthei had reason for prefer, than those person whose featherstoneblood wa ill-nourish, not from penuri on their part, but frompoverti. brother solomon and sister jane were rich, and the familycandor and total abstin from fals polit with which thei werealwai receiv seem to them no argument that their brother in thesolemn act of make hi will would overlook the superior claim ofwealth. themselv at least he had never been unnatur enough tobanish from hi hous, and it seem hardli eccentr that he shouldhav kept awai brother jonah, sister martha, and the rest, who had noshadow of such claim. thei knew peter’s maxim, that monei wa a goodegg, and should be laid in a warm nest.but brother jonah, sister martha, and all the needi exil, held adiffer point of view. probabl ar as variou as the face tobe seen at will in fretwork or paper-hang: everi form is there,from jupit to judi, if you onli look with creativ inclin. toth poorer and least favor it seem like that sinc peter had donenoth for them in hi life, he would rememb them at the last. jonahargu that men like to make a surpris of their will, while marthasaid that nobodi need be surpris if he left the best part of hismonei to those who least expect it. also it wa not to be thought butthat an own brother “ly there” with dropsi in hi leg must come tofeel that blood wa thicker than water, and if he didn’t alter hiswil, he might have monei by him. at ani rate some blood-relationsshould be on the premis and on the watch against those who werehardli relat at all. such thing had been known as forg will anddisput will, which seem to have the golden-hazi advantag ofsomehow enabl non-legate to live out of them. again, those whower no blood-relat might be caught make awai with thing—andpoor peter “ly there” helpless! somebodi should be on the watch. butin thi conclus thei were at on with solomon and jane; also, somenephew, niec, and cousin, argu with still greater subtilti as towhat might be done by a man abl to “will awai” hi properti and givehimself larg treat of odditi, felt in a handsom sort of wai thatther wa a famili interest to be attend to, and thought of stonecourt as a place which it would be noth but right for them to visit.sister martha, otherwis mr. cranch, live with some wheezi inth chalki flat, could not undertak the journei; but her son, asb poor peter’s own nephew, could repres her advantag, andwatch lest hi uncl jonah should make an unfair us of the improbableth which seem like to happen. in fact there wa a gener senserun in the featherston blood that everybodi must watch everybodyels, and that it would be well for everybodi els to reflect that thealmighti wa watch him.thu stone court continu saw on or other blood-relat alightingor depart, and mari garth had the unpleas task of carri theirmessag to mr. featherston, who would see none of them, and sent herdown with the still more unpleas task of tell them so. as managerof the household she felt bound to ask them in good provinci fashionto stai and eat; but she chose to consult mr. vinci on the point ofextra down-stair consumpt now that mr. featherston wa laid up.“oh, my dear, you must do thing handsom where there’s last illnessand a properti. god know, i don’t grudg them everi ham in thehous—onli, save the best for the funer. have some stuf vealalwai, and a fine chees in cut. you must expect to keep open hous inthes last ill,” said liber mr. vinci, onc more of cheerfulnot and bright plumag.but some of the visitor alight and did not depart after the handsometr to veal and ham. brother jonah, for exampl (there ar suchunpleas peopl in most famili; perhap even in the highestaristocraci there ar brobdingnag specimen, gigant in debt andbloat at greater expens)—brother jonah, i sai, have come down inth world, wa mainli support by a call which he wa modest enoughnot to boast of, though it wa much better than swindl either onexchang or turf, but which did not requir hi presenc at brass solong as he had a good corner to sit in and a suppli of food. he choseth kitchen-corner, partli becaus he like it best, and partli becauseh did not want to sit with solomon, concern whom he had a strongbrotherli opinion. seat in a famou arm-chair and in hi best suit,constantli within sight of good cheer, he had a comfortableconsci of be on the premis, mingl with fleetingsuggest of sundai and the bar at the green man; and he informedmari garth that he should not go out of reach of hi brother peterwhil that poor fellow wa abov ground. the troublesom on in afamili ar usual either the wit or the idiot. jonah wa the witamong the featherston, and joke with the maid-servant when theycam about the hearth, but seem to consid miss garth a suspiciouscharact, and follow her with cold ey.mari would have born thi on pair of ey with compar eas, butunfortun there wa young cranch, who, have come all the wai fromth chalki flat to repres hi mother and watch hi uncl jonah,also felt it hi duti to stai and to sit chiefli in the kitchen to givehi uncl compani. young cranch wa not exactli the balanc pointbetween the wit and the idiot,—verg slightli toward the lattertyp, and squint so as to leav everyth in doubt about hissenti except that thei were not of a forcibl charact. when marygarth enter the kitchen and mr. jonah featherston began to followh with hi cold detect ey, young cranch turn hi head in thesam direct seem to insist on it that she should remark how he wassquint, as if he did it with design, like the gypsi when borrowread the new testament to them. thi wa rather too much for poor mari;sometim it made her biliou, sometim it upset her graviti. on daythat she had an opportun she could not resist describ the kitchenscen to fred, who would not be hinder from immedi go to seeit, affect simpli to pass through. but no sooner did he face thefour ey than he had to rush through the nearest door which happenedto lead to the dairi, and there under the high roof and among the pansh gave wai to laughter which made a hollow reson perfectli audiblein the kitchen. he fled by anoth doorwai, but mr. jonah, who had notbefor seen fred’s white complexion, long leg, and pinch delicaci offac, prepar mani sarcasm in which these point of appear werewittili combin with the lowest moral attribut.“why, tom, _you_ don’t wear such gentlemanli trouser—you haven’t gothalf such fine long leg,” said jonah to hi nephew, wink at thesam time, to impli that there wa someth more in these statementsthan their undeni. tom look at hi leg, but left ituncertain whether he prefer hi moral advantag to a more viciouslength of limb and reprehens gentil of trouser.in the larg wainscot parlor too there were constantli pair of eyeson the watch, and own rel eager to be “sitter-up.” mani came,lunch, and depart, but brother solomon and the ladi who had beenjan featherston for twenti-five year befor she wa mr. waul foundit good to be there everi dai for hour, without other calculableoccup than that of observ the cun mari garth (who wa sodeep that she could be found out in noth) and give occasion drywrinkli indic of cry—as if capabl of torrent in a wetterseason—at the thought that thei were not allow to go into mr.featherston’s room. for the old man’s dislik of hi own famili seemedto get stronger as he got less abl to amus himself by sai bitingth to them. too languid to sting, he had the more venom refluent inhi blood.not fulli believ the messag sent through mari garth, thei hadpres themselv togeth within the door of the bedroom, both inblack—mr. waul have a white handkerchief partial unfold in herhand—and both with face in a sort of half-mourn purpl; while mr.vinci with her pink cheek and pink ribbon fly wa actuallyadminist a cordial to their own brother, and thelight-complexion fred, hi short hair curl as might be expect ina gambler’s, wa loll at hi eas in a larg chair.old featherston no sooner caught sight of these funer figuresappear in spite of hi order than rage came to strengthen him moresuccessfulli than the cordial. he wa prop up on a bed-rest, andalwai had hi gold-head stick ly by him. he seiz it now andswept it backward and forward in as larg an area as he could,appar to ban these ugli spectr, cry in a hoars sort ofscreech—“back, back, mr. waul! back, solomon!”“oh, brother. peter,” mr. waul began—but solomon put hi hand beforeh repressingli. he wa a larg-cheek man, nearli seventi, withsmal furtiv ey, and wa not onli of much blander temper but thoughthimself much deeper than hi brother peter; inde not like to bedeceiv in ani of hi fellow-men, inasmuch as thei could not well bemor greedi and deceit than he suspect them of be. even theinvis power, he thought, were like to be sooth by a blandparenthesi here and there—come from a man of properti, who mighthav been as impiou as other.“brother peter,” he said, in a wheedl yet grave offici tone,“it’s noth but right i should speak to you about the three croftsand the manganes. the almighti know what i’ve got on my mind—”“then he know more than i want to know,” said peter, lai down hisstick with a show of truce which had a threat in it too, for herevers the stick so as to make the gold handl a club in case ofclos fight, and look hard at solomon’s bald head.“there’s thing you might repent of, brother, for want of speak tome,” said solomon, not advanc, howev. “i could sit up with youto-night, and jane with me, willingli, and you might take your own timeto speak, or let me speak.”“ye, i shall take my own time—you needn’t offer me your,” said peter.“but you can’t take your own time to die in, brother,” began mr.waul, with her usual woolli tone. “and when you lie speechless you mayb tire of have stranger about you, and you mai think of me and mychildren”—but here her voic broke under the touch thought which shewa attribut to her speechless brother; the mention of ourselvesb natur affect.“no, i shan’t,” said old featherston, contradicti. “i shan’tthink of ani of you. i’ve made my will, i tell you, i’ve made my will.”here he turn hi head toward mr. vinci, and swallow some more ofhi cordial.“some peopl would be asham to fill up a place belong by right toother,” said mr. waul, turn her narrow ey in the samedirect.“oh, sister,” said solomon, with iron soft, “you and me ar notfin, and handsom, and clever enough: we must be humbl and let smartpeopl push themselv befor us.”fred’s spirit could not bear thi: rise and look at mr.featherston, he said, “shall my mother and i leav the room, sir, thatyou mai be alon with your friend?”“sit down, i tell you,” said old featherston, snappishli. “stop wherey ar. good-by, solomon,” he ad, try to wield hi stick again,but fail now that he had revers the handl. “good-by, mr. waul.don’t you come again.”“i shall be down-stair, brother, whether or no,” said solomon. “ishal do my duti, and it remain to be seen what the almighti willallow.”“ye, in properti go out of famili,” said mr. waul, incontinu,—“and where there’s steadi young men to carri on. but ipiti them who ar not such, and i piti their mother. good-by, brotherpet.”“rememb, i’m the eldest after you, brother, and prosper from thefirst, just as you did, and have got land alreadi by the name offeatherston,” said solomon, reli much on that reflect, as onewhich might be suggest in the watch of the night. “but i bid yougood-by for the present.”their exit wa hasten by their see old mr. featherston pull hiswig on each side and shut hi ey with hi mouth-widen grimac, asif he were determin to be deaf and blind.none the less thei came to stone court daili and sat below at the postof duti, sometim carri on a slow dialogu in an underton in whichth observ and respons were so far apart, that ani on hearingthem might have imagin himself listen to speak automata, insom doubt whether the ingeni mechan would realli work, or winditself up for a long time in order to stick and be silent. solomon andjan would have been sorri to be quick: what that led to might be seenon the other side of the wall in the person of brother jonah.but their watch in the wainscot parlor wa sometim vari by thepres of other guest from far or near. now that peter featherstonewa up-stair, hi properti could be discuss with all that localenlighten to be found on the spot: some rural and middlemarchneighbor express much agreement with the famili and sympathi withtheir interest against the vinci, and feminin visitor were evenmov to tear, in convers with mr. waul, when thei recal thefact that thei themselv had been disappoint in time past bycodicil and marriag for spite on the part of ungrat elderlygentlemen, who, it might have been suppos, had been spare forsometh better. such convers paus suddenli, like an organ whenth bellow ar let drop, if mari garth came into the room; and alley were turn on her as a possibl legate, or on who might getaccess to iron chest.but the younger men who were rel or connect of the famili,were dispos to admir her in thi problemat light, as a girl whoshow much conduct, and who among all the chanc that were flyingmight turn out to be at least a moder prize. henc she had her shareof compliment and polit attent.especi from mr. borthrop trumbul, a distinguish bachelor andauction of those part, much concern in the sale of land andcattl: a public charact, inde, whose name wa seen on widelydistribut placard, and who might reason be sorri for those whodid not know of him. he wa second cousin to peter featherston, andhad been treat by him with more amen than ani other rel,be us in matter of busi; and in that programm of hisfuner which the old man had himself dictat, he had been name as abear. there wa no odiou cupid in mr. borthrop trumbul—nothingmor than a sincer sens of hi own merit, which, he wa awar, incas of rivalri might tell against competitor; so that if peterfeatherston, who so far as he, trumbul, wa concern, had behavedlik as good a soul as ever breath, should have done anythinghandsom by him, all he could sai wa, that he had never fish andfawn, but had advis him to the best of hi experi, which nowextend over twenti year from the time of hi apprenticeship atfifteen, and wa like to yield a knowledg of no surreptiti kind.hi admir wa far from be confin to himself, but wasaccustom profession as well as privat to delight in estimatingth at a high rate. he wa an amateur of superior phrase, and neverus poor languag without immedi correct himself—which wasfortun, as he wa rather loud, and given to predomin, stand orwalk about frequent, pull down hi waistcoat with the air of aman who is veri much of hi own opinion, trim himself rapidli withhi fore-finger, and mark each new seri in these movement by abusi plai with hi larg seal. there wa occasion a littlefierc in hi demeanor, but it wa direct chiefli against falseopinion, of which there is so much to correct in the world that a manof some read and experi necessarili ha hi patienc tri. hefelt that the featherston famili gener wa of limitedunderstand, but be a man of the world and a public charact,took everyth as a matter of cours, and even went to convers withmr. jonah and young cranch in the kitchen, not doubt that he hadimpress the latter greatli by hi lead question concern thechalki flat. if anybodi had observ that mr. borthrop trumbul, beingan auction, wa bound to know the natur of everyth, he wouldhav smile and trim himself silent with the sens that he camepretti near that. on the whole, in an auction wai, he wa anhonor man, not asham of hi busi, and feel that “thecelebr peel, now sir robert,” if introduc to him, would not failto recogn hi import.“i don’t mind if i have a slice of that ham, and a glass of that al,miss garth, if you will allow me,” he said, come into the parlor athalf-past eleven, after have had the except privileg of seeingold featherston, and stand with hi back to the fire between mr.waul and solomon.“it’s not necessari for you to go out;—let me ring the bell.”“thank you,” said mari, “i have an errand.”“well, mr. trumbul, you’re highli favor,” said mr. waul.“what! see the old man?” said the auction, plai with hi sealsdispassion. “ah, you see he ha reli on me consider.” hereh press hi lip togeth, and frown medit.“might anybodi ask what their brother ha been sai?” said solomon,in a soft tone of humil, in which he had a sens of luxuriouscun, he be a rich man and not in need of it.“oh ye, anybodi mai ask,” said mr. trumbul, with loud andgood-humor though cut sarcasm. “anybodi mai interrog. ani onemai give their remark an interrog turn,” he continu, hissonor rise with hi style. “thi is constantli done by goodspeak, even when thei anticip no answer. it is what we call afigur of speech—speech at a high figur, as on mai sai.” the eloquentauction smile at hi own ingenu.“i shouldn’t be sorri to hear he’d rememb you, mr. trumbul,” saidsolomon. “i never wa against the deserv. it’s the undeserv i’magainst.”“ah, there it is, you see, there it is,” said mr. trumbul,significantli. “it can’t be deni that undeserv peopl have beenlegate, and even residuari legate. it is so, with testamentarydisposit.” again he purs up hi lip and frown a littl.“do you mean to sai for certain, mr. trumbul, that my brother ha lefthi land awai from our famili?” said mr. waul, on whom, as anunhop woman, those long word had a depress effect.“a man might as well turn hi land into chariti land at onc as leaveit to some peopl,” observ solomon, hi sister’s question havingdrawn no answer.“what, blue-coat land?” said mr. waul, again. “oh, mr. trumbul, younev can mean to sai that. it would be fly in the face of thealmighti that’s prosper him.”while mr. waul wa speak, mr. borthrop trumbul walk awai fromth fireplac toward the window, patrol with hi fore-finger roundth insid of hi stock, then along hi whisker and the curv of hishair. he now walk to miss garth’s work-tabl, open a book which layther and read the titl aloud with pompou emphasi as if he wereoff it for sale:“‘ann of geierstein’ (pronounc jeersteen) or the ‘maiden of themist, by the author of waverlei.’” then turn the page, he begansonor—“the cours of four centuri ha well-nigh elaps sinceth seri of event which ar relat in the follow chapter tookplac on the contin.” he pronounc the last truli admir wordwith the accent on the last syllabl, not as unawar of vulgar usag,but feel that thi novel deliveri enhanc the sonor beauti whichhi read had given to the whole.and now the servant came in with the trai, so that the moment foransw mr. waul’s question had gone by safe, while she andsolomon, watch mr. trumbul’s movement, were think that highlearn interf sadli with seriou affair. mr. borthrop trumbullr knew noth about old featherston’s will; but he could hardlyhav been brought to declar ani ignor unless he had been arrestedfor mispris of treason.“i shall take a mere mouth of ham and a glass of al,” he said,reassuringli. “as a man with public busi, i take a snack when ican. i will back thi ham,” he ad, after swallow some morselswith alarm hast, “against ani ham in the three kingdom. in myopinion it is better than the ham at freshitt hall—and i think i am atoler judg.”“some don’t like so much sugar in their ham,” said mr. waul. “but mypoor brother would alwai have sugar.”“if ani person demand better, he is at liberti to do so; but, godbless me, what an aroma! i should be glad to bui in that qualiti, iknow. there is some gratif to a gentleman”—here mr. trumbul’svoic convei an emot remonstr—“in have thi kind of hamset on hi tabl.”he push asid hi plate, pour out hi glass of al and drew hischair a littl forward, profit by the occas to look at the innersid of hi leg, which he stroke approvingli—mr. trumbul have allthos less frivol air and gestur which distinguish thepredomin race of the north.“you have an interest work there, i see, miss garth,” he observ,when mari re-enter. “it is by the author of ‘waverlei’: that is sirwalt scott. i have bought on of hi work myself—a veri nice thing,a veri superior public, entitl ‘ivanho.’ you will not get anywrit to beat him in a hurri, i think—he will not, in my opinion, bespeedili surpass. i have just been read a portion at thecommenc of ‘ann of jeersteen.’ it commenc well.” (thing neverbegan with mr. borthrop trumbul: thei alwai commenc, both inpriv life and on hi handbil.) “you ar a reader, i see. do yousubscrib to our middlemarch librari?”“no,” said mari. “mr. fred vinci brought thi book.”“i am a great bookman myself,” return mr. trumbul. “i have no lessthan two hundr volum in calf, and i flatter myself thei ar wellselect. also pictur by murillo, ruben, tenier, titian, vandyck,and other. i shall be happi to lend you ani work you like to mention,miss garth.”“i am much oblig,” said mari, hasten awai again, “but i havelittl time for read.”“i should sai my brother ha done someth for _her_ in hi will,”said mr. solomon, in a veri low underton, when she had shut the doorbehind her, point with hi head toward the absent mari.“hi first wife wa a poor match for him, though,” said mr. waul.“she brought him noth: and thi young woman is onli her niec,—andveri proud. and my brother ha alwai paid her wage.”“a sensibl girl though, in my opinion,” said mr. trumbul, finishinghi al and start up with an emphat adjust of hi waistcoat.“i have observ her when she ha been mix medicin in drop. shemind what she is do, sir. that is a great point in a woman, and agreat point for our friend up-stair, poor dear old soul. a man whoselif is of ani valu should think of hi wife as a nurs: that is whati should do, if i marri; and i believ i have live singl longenough not to make a mistak in that line. some men must marri toelev themselv a littl, but when i am in need of that, i hope someon will tell me so—i hope some individu will appris me of the fact.i wish you good morn, mr. waul. good morn, mr. solomon. i trustw shall meet under less melancholi auspic.”when mr. trumbul had depart with a fine bow, solomon, leaningforward, observ to hi sister, “you mai depend, jane, my brother hasleft that girl a lump sum.”“anybodi would think so, from the wai mr. trumbul talk,” said jane.then, after a paus, “he talk as if my daughter wasn’t to be trustedto give drop.”“auction talk wild,” said solomon. “not but what trumbul ha mademonei.”chapter xxxiii.“close up hi ey and draw the curtain close;and let us all to medit.”—2 _henri vi_.that night after twelv o’clock mari garth reliev the watch in mr.featherston’s room, and sat there alon through the small hour. sheoften chose thi task, in which she found some pleasur,notwithstand the old man’s testi whenev he demand herattent. there were interv in which she could sit perfectlystil, enjoi the outer still and the subdu light. the red firewith it gentli audibl movement seem like a solemn exist calmlyindepend of the petti passion, the imbecil desir, the strainingaft worthless uncertainti, which were daili move her contempt.mari wa fond of her own thought, and could amus herself well sittingin twilight with her hand in her lap; for, have earli had strongreason to believ that thing were not like to be arrang for herpeculiar satisfact, she wast no time in astonish and annoyanceat that fact. and she had alreadi come to take life veri much as acomedi in which she had a proud, nai, a gener resolut not to actth mean or treacher part. mari might have becom cynic if she hadnot had parent whom she honor, and a well of affection gratitudewithin her, which wa all the fuller becaus she had learn to make nounreason claim.she sat to-night revolv, as she wa wont, the scene of the dai, herlip often curl with amus at the odditi to which her fancyad fresh drolleri: peopl were so ridicul with their illus,carri their fool’s cap unawar, think their own li opaquewhil everybodi els’s were transpar, make themselv exceptionsto everyth, as if when all the world look yellow under a lamp theyalon were rosi. yet there were some illus under mari’s ey whichwer not quit comic to her. she wa secretli convinc, though she hadno other ground than her close observ of old featherston’snatur, that in spite of hi fond for have the vinci about him,thei were as like to be disappoint as ani of the relat whom hekept at a distanc. she had a good deal of disdain for mr. vinci’sevid alarm lest she and fred should be alon togeth, but it didnot hinder her from think anxious of the wai in which fred wouldb affect, if it should turn out that hi uncl had left him as poora ever. she could make a butt of fred when he wa present, but she didnot enjoi hi folli when he wa absent.yet she like her thought: a vigor young mind not overbalanc bypass, find a good in make acquaint with life, and watch itsown power with interest. mari had plenti of merriment within.her thought wa not vein by ani solemn or patho about the old manon the bed: such sentiment ar easier to affect than to feel about anag creatur whose life is not visibl anyth but a remnant ofvic. she had alwai seen the most disagre side of mr.featherston: he wa not proud of her, and she wa onli us to him.to be anxiou about a soul that is alwai snap at you must be leftto the saint of the earth; and mari wa not on of them. she had neverreturn him a harsh word, and had wait on him faithfulli: that washer utmost. old featherston himself wa not in the least anxiou abouthi soul, and had declin to see mr. tucker on the subject.to-night he had not snap, and for the first hour or two he layremark still, until at last mari heard him rattl hi bunch ofkei against the tin box which he alwai kept in the bed besid him.about three o’clock he said, with remark distinct, “missi, comeher!”mari obei, and found that he had alreadi drawn the tin box from underth cloth, though he usual ask to have thi done for him; and hehad select the kei. he now unlock the box, and, draw from itanoth kei, look straight at her with ey that seem to haverecov all their sharp and said, “how mani of ’em ar in thehous?”“you mean of your own relat, sir,” said mari, well us to the oldman’s wai of speech. he nod slightli and she went on.“mr. jonah featherston and young cranch ar sleep here.”“oh ay, thei stick, do thei? and the rest—thei come everi dai, i’llwarrant—solomon and jane, and all the young un? thei come peep, andcount and cast up?”“not all of them everi dai. mr. solomon and mr. waul ar here everydai, and the other come often.”the old man listen with a grimac while she spoke, and then said,relax hi face, “the more fool thei. you hearken, missi. it’s threeo’clock in the morn, and i’ve got all my faculti as well as ever ihad in my life. i know all my properti, and where the monei’s put out,and everyth. and i’ve made everyth readi to chang my mind, anddo as i like at the last. do you hear, missi? i’ve got my faculti.”“well, sir?” said mari, quietli.he now lower hi tone with an air of deeper cun. “i’ve made twowil, and i’m go to burn on. now you do as i tell you. thi is thekei of my iron chest, in the closet there. you push well at the side ofth brass plate at the top, till it goe like a bolt: then you can putth kei in the front lock and turn it. see and do that; and take outth topmost paper—last will and testament—big print.”“no, sir,” said mari, in a firm voic, “i cannot do that.”“not do it? i tell you, you must,” said the old man, hi voicebegin to shake under the shock of thi resist.“i cannot touch your iron chest or your will. i must refus to doanyth that might lai me open to suspicion.”“i tell you, i’m in my right mind. shan’t i do as i like at the last? imad two will on purpos. take the kei, i sai.”“no, sir, i will not,” said mari, more resolut still. her repulsionwa get stronger.“i tell you, there’s no time to lose.”“i cannot help that, sir. i will not let the close of your life soilth begin of mine. i will not touch your iron chest or your will.”she move to a littl distanc from the bedsid.the old man paus with a blank stare for a littl while, hold theon kei erect on the ring; then with an agit jerk he began to workwith hi boni left hand at empti the tin box befor him.“missi,” he began to sai, hurriedli, “look here! take the monei—thenot and gold—look here—take it—you shall have it all—do as i tellyou.”he made an effort to stretch out the kei toward her as far asposs, and mari again retreat.“i will not touch your kei or your monei, sir. prai don’t ask me to doit again. if you do, i must go and call your brother.”he let hi hand fall, and for the first time in her life mari saw oldpet featherston begin to cry childishli. she said, in as gentl aton as she could command, “prai put up your monei, sir;” and then wentawai to her seat by the fire, hope thi would help to convinc himthat it wa useless to sai more. present he ralli and said eagerli—“look here, then. call the young chap. call fred vinci.”mari’s heart began to beat more quickli. variou idea rush throughher mind as to what the burn of a second will might impli. she hadto make a difficult decis in a hurri.“i will call him, if you will let me call mr. jonah and other withhim.”“nobodi els, i sai. the young chap. i shall do as i like.”“wait till broad daylight, sir, when everi on is stir. or let mecal simmon now, to go and fetch the lawyer? he can be here in lessthan two hour.”“lawyer? what do i want with the lawyer? nobodi shall know—i sai,nobodi shall know. i shall do as i like.”“let me call some on els, sir,” said mari, persuas. she did notlik her posit—alon with the old man, who seem to show a strangeflar of nervou energi which enabl him to speak again and againwithout fall into hi usual cough; yet she desir not to pushunnecessarili the contradict which agit him. “let me, prai, callsom on els.”“you let me alon, i sai. look here, missi. take the monei. you’llnever have the chanc again. it’s pretti nigh two hundr—there’s morein the box, and nobodi know how much there wa. take it and do as itel you.”mari, stand by the fire, saw it red light fall on the old man,prop up on hi pillow and bed-rest, with hi boni hand hold outth kei, and the monei ly on the quilt befor him. she never forgotthat vision of a man want to do as he like at the last. but the wayin which he had put the offer of the monei urg her to speak withhard resolut than ever.“it is of no us, sir. i will not do it. put up your monei. i will nottouch your monei. i will do anyth els i can to comfort you; but iwil not touch your kei or your monei.”“anyth els—anyth els!” said old featherston, with hoars rage,which, as if in a nightmar, tri to be loud, and yet wa onli justaud. “i want noth els. you come here—you come here.”mari approach him cautious, know him too well. she saw himdrop hi kei and try to grasp hi stick, while he look at herlik an ag hyena, the muscl of hi face get distort with theeffort of hi hand. she paus at a safe distanc.“let me give you some cordial,” she said, quietli, “and try to composeyourself. you will perhap go to sleep. and to-morrow by daylight youcan do as you like.”he lift the stick, in spite of her be beyond hi reach, and threwit with a hard effort which wa but impot. it fell, slip overth foot of the bed. mari let it lie, and retreat to her chair by thefir. by-and-by she would go to him with the cordial. fatigu wouldmak him passiv. it wa get toward the chillest moment of themorn, the fire had got low, and she could see through the chinkbetween the moreen window-curtain the light whiten by the blind.have put some wood on the fire and thrown a shawl over her, she satdown, hope that mr. featherston might now fall asleep. if she wentnear him the irrit might be kept up. he had said noth afterthrow the stick, but she had seen him take hi kei again andlai hi right hand on the monei. he did not put it up, howev, andsh thought that he wa drop off to sleep.but mari herself began to be more agit by the remembr of whatsh had gone through, than she had been by the realiti—questioningthos act of her which had come imper and exclud allquest in the critic moment.present the dry wood sent out a flame which illumin everycrevic, and mari saw that the old man wa ly quietli with hi headturn a littl on on side. she went toward him with inaud step,and thought that hi face look strang motionless; but the nextmoment the movement of the flame commun itself to all objectsmad her uncertain. the violent beat of her heart render herpercept so doubt that even when she touch him and listen forhi breath, she could not trust her conclus. she went to thewindow and gentli prop asid the curtain and blind, so that thestil light of the sky fell on the bed.the next moment she ran to the bell and rang it energet. in averi littl while there wa no longer ani doubt that peter featherstonewa dead, with hi right hand clasp the kei, and hi left handli on the heap of note and gold.book iv.three love problem.chapter xxxiv.“1_st gent_. such men as thi ar feather, chip, and straw, carri no weight, no forc.2_d gent_. but leviti is causal too, and make the sum of weight. for power find it place in lack of power; advanc is cession, and the driven ship mai run aground becaus the helmsman’s thought lack forc to balanc opposit.”it wa on a morn of mai that peter featherston wa buri. in theprosa neighborhood of middlemarch, mai wa not alwai warm and sunni,and on thi particular morn a chill wind wa blow the blossomsfrom the surround garden on to the green mound of lowickchurchyard. swiftli move cloud onli now and then allow a gleam tolight up ani object, whether ugli or beauti, that happen to standwithin it golden shower. in the churchyard the object were remarkablyvari, for there wa a littl countri crowd wait to see thefuner. the new had spread that it wa to be a “big buri;” the oldgentleman had left written direct about everyth and meant tohav a funer “beyond hi better.” thi wa true; for oldfeatherston had not been a harpagon whose passion had all beendevour by the ever-lean and ever-hungri passion of save, and whowould drive a bargain with hi undertak beforehand. he love monei,but he also love to spend it in gratifi hi peculiar tast, andperhap he love it best of all as a mean of make other feel hispow more or less uncomfort. if ani on will here contend thatther must have been trait of good in old featherston, i will notpresum to deni thi; but i must observ that good is of a modestnatur, easili discourag, and when much privaci, elbow in earlylif by unabash vice, is apt to retir into extrem privaci, so thatit is more easili believ in by those who construct a selfish oldgentleman theoret, than by those who form the narrow judgmentsbas on hi person acquaint. in ani case, he had been bent onhav a handsom funer, and on have person “bid” to it who wouldrath have stai at home. he had even desir that femal relativesshould follow him to the grave, and poor sister martha had taken adifficult journei for thi purpos from the chalki flat. she and janewould have been altogeth cheer (in a tear manner) by thi signthat a brother who dislik see them while he wa live had beenprospect fond of their presenc when he should have becom atest, if the sign had not been made equivoc by be extend tomr. vinci, whose expens in handsom crape seem to impli the mostpresumptu hope, aggrav by a bloom of complexion which toldpretti plainli that she wa not a blood-relat, but of that generallyobjection class call wife’s kin.we ar all of us imagin in some form or other, for imag ar thebrood of desir; and poor old featherston, who laugh much at the wayin which other cajol themselv, did not escap the fellowship ofillus. in write the programm for hi burial he certainli did notmak clear to himself that hi pleasur in the littl drama of which itform a part wa confin to anticip. in chuckl over thevex he could inflict by the rigid clutch of hi dead hand, heinevit mingl hi conscious with that livid stagnant presenc,and so far as he wa preoccupi with a futur life, it wa with on ofgratif insid hi coffin. thu old featherston wa imagin,after hi fashion.howev, the three mourn-coach were fill accord to thewritten order of the deceas. there were pall-bearer on horseback,with the richest scarf and hatband, and even the under-bearer hadtrap of woe which were of a good well-price qualiti. the blackprocess, when dismount, look the larger for the small of thechurchyard; the heavi human face and the black draperi shiver inth wind seem to tell of a world strang incongru with thelightli drop blossom and the gleam of sunshin on the daisi.the clergyman who met the process wa mr. cadwallad—also accordingto the request of peter featherston, prompt as usual by peculiarreason. have a contempt for curat, whom he alwai calledunderstrapp, he wa resolv to be buri by a benef clergyman.mr. casaubon wa out of the question, not mere becaus he declinedduti of thi sort, but becaus featherston had an especi dislik tohim as the rector of hi own parish, who had a lien on the land in theshap of tith, also as the deliver of morn sermon, which the oldman, be in hi pew and not at all sleepi, had been oblig to sitthrough with an inward snarl. he had an object to a parson stuck upabov hi head preach to him. but hi relat with mr. cadwalladerhad been of a differ kind: the trout-stream which ran through mr.casaubon’s land took it cours through featherston’s also, so thatmr. cadwallad wa a parson who had had to ask a favor instead ofpreach. moreov, he wa on of the high gentri live four milesawai from lowick, and wa thu exalt to an equal sky with the sheriffof the counti and other digniti vagu regard as necessari to thesystem of thing. there would be a satisfact in be buri by mr.cadwallad, whose veri name offer a fine opportun for pronouncingwrongli if you like.thi distinct confer on the rector of tipton and freshitt wa thereason why mr. cadwallad made on of the group that watch oldfeatherston’s funer from an upper window of the manor. she wa notfond of visit that hous, but she like, as she said, to seecollect of strang anim such as there would be at thi funer;and she had persuad sir jame and the young ladi chettam to drive therector and herself to lowick in order that the visit might bealtogeth pleasant.“i will go anywher with you, mr. cadwallad,” celia had said; “but idon’t like funer.”“oh, my dear, when you have a clergyman in your famili you mustaccommod your tast: i did that veri earli. when i marri humphreyi made up my mind to like sermon, and i set out by like the end verymuch. that soon spread to the middl and the begin, becaus icouldn’t have the end without them.”“no, to be sure not,” said the dowag ladi chettam, with statelyemphasi.the upper window from which the funer could be well seen wa in theroom occupi by mr. casaubon when he had been forbidden to work; buth had resum nearli hi habitu style of life now in spite ofwarn and prescript, and after polit welcom mr.cadwallad had slip again into the librari to chew a cud of eruditemistak about cush and mizraim.but for her visitor dorothea too might have been shut up in thelibrari, and would not have wit thi scene of old featherston’sfuner, which, aloof as it seem to be from the tenor of her life,alwai afterward came back to her at the touch of certain sensitivepoint in memori, just as the vision of st. peter’s at rome wa inwovenwith mood of despond. scene which make vital chang in ourneighbor’ lot ar but the background of our own, yet, like aparticular aspect of the field and tree, thei becom associ foru with the epoch of our own histori, and make a part of that unitywhich li in the select of our keenest conscious.the dream-like associ of someth alien and ill-understood withth deepest secret of her experi seem to mirror that sens ofloneli which wa due to the veri ardor of dorothea’s natur. thecountri gentri of old time live in a rarefi social air: dot aparton their station up the mountain thei look down with imperfectdiscrimin on the belt of thicker life below. and dorothea wa notat eas in the perspect and chilli of that height.“i shall not look ani more,” said celia, after the train had enteredth church, place herself a littl behind her husband’s elbow so thatsh could slyli touch hi coat with her cheek. “i dare sai dodo likesit: she is fond of melancholi thing and ugli peopl.”“i am fond of know someth about the peopl i live among,” saiddorothea, who had been watch everyth with the interest of a monkon hi holidai tour. “it seem to me we know noth of our neighbor,unless thei ar cottag. on is constantli wonder what sort ofliv other peopl lead, and how thei take thing. i am quit obligedto mr. cadwallad for come and call me out of the librari.”“quit right to feel oblig to me,” said mr. cadwallad. “your richlowick farmer ar as curiou as ani buffalo or bison, and i daresai you don’t half see them at church. thei ar quit differ fromyour uncl’s tenant or sir jame’s—monster—farmer withoutlandlord—on can’t tell how to class them.”“most of these follow ar not lowick peopl,” said sir jame; “isuppos thei ar legate from a distanc, or from middlemarch.lovegood tell me the old fellow ha left a good deal of monei as wella land.”“think of that now! when so mani younger son can’t dine at their ownexpens,” said mr. cadwallad. “ah,” turn round at the sound ofth open door, “here is mr. brook. i felt that we were incompletebefor, and here is the explan. you ar come to see thi oddfuner, of cours?”“no, i came to look after casaubon—to see how he goe on, you know. andto bring a littl new—a littl new, my dear,” said mr. brook,nod at dorothea as she came toward him. “i look into thelibrari, and i saw casaubon over hi book. i told him it wouldn’t do:i said, ‘thi will never do, you know: think of your wife, casaubon.’and he promis me to come up. i didn’t tell him my new: i said, hemust come up.”“ah, now thei ar come out of church,” mr. cadwallad exclaim.“dear me, what a wonderfulli mix set! mr. lydgat as doctor, isuppos. but that is realli a good look woman, and the fair youngman must be her son. who ar thei, sir jame, do you know?”“i see vinci, the mayor of middlemarch; thei ar probabl hi wife andson,” said sir jame, look interrog at mr. brook, who noddedand said—“ye, a veri decent famili—a veri good fellow is vinci; a credit to themanufactur interest. you have seen him at my hous, you know.”“ah, ye: on of your secret committe,” said mr. cadwallad,provokingli.“a cours fellow, though,” said sir jame, with a fox-hunter’sdisgust.“and on of those who suck the life out of the wretch handloomweav in tipton and freshitt. that is how hi famili look so fair andsleek,” said mr. cadwallad. “those dark, purpl-face peopl ar anexcel foil. dear me, thei ar like a set of jug! do look athumphrei: on might fanci him an ugli archangel tower abov them inhi white surplic.”“it’s a solemn thing, though, a funer,” said mr. brook, “if you takeit in that light, you know.”“but i am not take it in that light. i can’t wear my solemn toooften, els it will go to rag. it wa time the old man di, and noneof these peopl ar sorri.”“how piteou!” said dorothea. “thi funer seem to me the most dismalth i ever saw. it is a blot on the morn. i cannot bear to thinkthat ani on should die and leav no love behind.”she wa go to sai more, but she saw her husband enter and seathimself a littl in the background. the differ hi presenc made toher wa not alwai a happi on: she felt that he often inwardlyobject to her speech.“posit,” exclaim mr. cadwallad, “there is a new face come outfrom behind that broad man queerer than ani of them: a littl roundhead with bulg ey—a sort of frog-face—do look. he must be ofanoth blood, i think.”“let me see!” said celia, with awaken curios, stand behind mr.cadwallad and lean forward over her head. “oh, what an odd face!”then with a quick chang to anoth sort of surpris express, shead, “why, dodo, you never told me that mr. ladislaw wa come again!”dorothea felt a shock of alarm: everi on notic her sudden palenessa she look up immedi at her uncl, while mr. casaubon look ather.“he came with me, you know; he is my guest—put up with me at thegrang,” said mr. brook, in hi easiest tone, nod at dorothea, asif the announc were just what she might have expect. “and wehav brought the pictur at the top of the carriag. i knew you wouldb pleas with the surpris, casaubon. there you ar to the verylif—as aquina, you know. quit the right sort of thing. and you willhear young ladislaw talk about it. he talk uncommonli well—point outthi, that, and the other—know art and everyth of thatkind—companion, you know—is up with you in ani track—what i’ve beenwant a long while.”mr. casaubon bow with cold polit, master hi irrit, butonli so far as to be silent. he rememb will’s letter quit as wella dorothea did; he had notic that it wa not among the letter whichhad been reserv for him on hi recoveri, and secretli conclud thatdorothea had sent word to will not to come to lowick, he had shrunkwith proud sensit from ever recur to the subject. he nowinf that she had ask her uncl to invit will to the grang; andsh felt it imposs at that moment to enter into ani explan.mr. cadwallad’s ey, divert from the churchyard, saw a good dealof dumb show which wa not so intellig to her as she could havedesir, and could not repress the question, “who is mr. ladislaw?”“a young rel of mr. casaubon’s,” said sir jame, promptli. hisgood-natur often made him quick and clear-see in person matter,and he had divin from dorothea’s glanc at her husband that there wassom alarm in her mind.“a veri nice young fellow—casaubon ha done everyth for him,”explain mr. brook. “he repai your expens in him, casaubon,” hewent on, nod encouragingli. “i hope he will stai with me a longwhil and we shall make someth of my document. i have plenti ofidea and fact, you know, and i can see he is just the man to put theminto shape—rememb what the right quotat ar, _omn tulitpunctum_, and that sort of thing—give subject a kind of turn. iinvit him some time ago when you were ill, casaubon; dorothea saidyou couldn’t have anybodi in the hous, you know, and she ask me towrit.”poor dorothea felt that everi word of her uncl’s wa about as pleasanta a grain of sand in the ey to mr. casaubon. it would be altogetherunfit now to explain that she had not wish her uncl to invitewil ladislaw. she could not in the least make clear to herself thereason for her husband’s dislik to hi presenc—a dislik painfullyimpress on her by the scene in the librari; but she felt theunbecoming of sai anyth that might convei a notion of it toother. mr. casaubon, inde, had not thoroughli repres thosemix reason to himself; irrit feel with him, as with all ofu, seek rather for justif than for self-knowledg. but hewish to repress outward sign, and onli dorothea could discern thechang in her husband’s face befor he observ with more of dignifiedbend and sing-song than usual—“you ar exceedingli hospit, my dear sir; and i ow youacknowledg for exercis your hospit toward a rel ofmin.”the funer wa end now, and the churchyard wa be clear.“now you can see him, mr. cadwallad,” said celia. “he is just like aminiatur of mr. casaubon’s aunt that hang in dorothea’s boudoir—quitenic-look.”“a veri pretti sprig,” said mr. cadwallad, dryli. “what is yournephew to be, mr. casaubon?”“pardon me, he is not my nephew. he is my cousin.”“well, you know,” interpos mr. brook, “he is try hi wing. he isjust the sort of young fellow to rise. i should be glad to give him anopportun. he would make a good secretari, now, like hobb, milton,swift—that sort of man.”“i understand,” said mr. cadwallad. “on who can write speech.”“i’ll fetch him in now, eh, casaubon?” said mr. brook. “he wouldn’tcome in till i had announc him, you know. and we’ll go down and lookat the pictur. there you ar to the life: a deep subtl sort ofthink with hi fore-finger on the page, while saint bonaventur orsomebodi els, rather fat and florid, is look up at the triniti.everyth is symbol, you know—the higher style of art: i like thatup to a certain point, but not too far—it’s rather strain to keep upwith, you know. but you ar at home in that, casaubon. and yourpaint’s flesh is good—solid, transpar, everyth of thatsort. i went into that a great deal at on time. howev, i’ll go andfetch ladislaw.”chapter xxxv.“non, je ne comprend pa de plu charmant plaisirqu de voir d’héritier un troup affligéel maintien interdit, et la mine allongé,lire un long testament où pale, étonnéson leur laiss un bonsoir avec un pi de nez.pour voir au naturel leur tristess profondej reviendrai, je croi, exprè de l’autr mond.”—regnard: _le légatair universel_.when the anim enter the ark in pair, on mai imagin that alliedspeci made much privat remark on each other, and were tempt tothink that so mani form feed on the same store of fodder wereemin superflu, as tend to diminish the ration. (i fear thepart plai by the vultur on that occas would be too pain forart to repres, those bird be disadvantag nake about thegullet, and appar without rite and ceremoni.)the same sort of temptat befel the christian carnivora who formedpet featherston’s funer process; most of them have theirmind bent on a limit store which each would have like to get themost of. the long-recogn blood-relat and connect bymarriag made alreadi a goodli number, which, multipli byposs, present a fine rang for jealou conjectur andpathet hope. jealousi of the vinci had creat a fellowshipin hostil among all person of the featherston blood, so that inth absenc of ani decid indic that on of themselv wa tohav more than the rest, the dread lest that long-leg fred vincyshould have the land wa necessarili domin, though it left abundantfeel and leisur for vaguer jealousi, such as were entertainedtoward mari garth. solomon found time to reflect that jonah wasundeserv, and jonah to abus solomon as greedi; jane, the eldersist, held that martha’s children ought not to expect so much as theyoung waul; and martha, more lax on the subject of primogenitur, wassorri to think that jane wa so “have.” these nearest of kin werenatur impress with the unreason of expect incousin and second cousin, and us their arithmet in reckon thelarg sum that small legaci might mount to, if there were too manyof them. two cousin were present to hear the will, and a second cousinbesid mr. trumbul. thi second cousin wa a middlemarch mercer ofpolit manner and superflu aspir. the two cousin were elderlymen from brass, on of them consciou of claim on the score ofinconveni expens sustain by him in present of oyster and othereat to hi rich cousin peter; the other entir saturnin,lean hi hand and chin on a stick, and consciou of claim base onno narrow perform but on merit gener: both blameless citizensof brass, who wish that jonah featherston did not live there. thewit of a famili is usual best receiv among stranger.“why, trumbul himself is pretti sure of five hundr—_that_ you maydepend,—i shouldn’t wonder if my brother promis him,” said solomon,muse aloud with hi sister, the even befor the funer.“dear, dear!” said poor sister martha, whose imagin of hundredshad been habitu narrow to the amount of her unpaid rent.but in the morn all the ordinari current of conjectur weredisturb by the presenc of a strang mourner who had plash amongthem as if from the moon. thi wa the stranger describ by mr.cadwallad as frog-face: a man perhap about two or three and thirti,whose promin ey, thin-lip, downward-curv mouth, and hairsleekli brush awai from a forehead that sank suddenli abov the ridgeof the eyebrow, certainli gave hi face a batrachian unchangeablenessof express. here, clearli, wa a new legate; els why wa he biddena a mourner? here were new possibl, rais a new uncertainti,which almost check remark in the mourn-coach. we ar allhumili by the sudden discoveri of a fact which ha exist verycomfort and perhap been stare at us in privat while we havebeen make up our world entir without it. no on had seen thisquestion stranger befor except mari garth, and she knew nothingmor of him than that he had twice been to stone court when mr.featherston wa down-stair, and had sat alon with him for severalhour. she had found an opportun of mention thi to her father,and perhap caleb’s were the onli ey, except the lawyer’s, whichexamin the stranger with more of inquiri than of disgust orsuspicion. caleb garth, have littl expect and less cupid,wa interest in the verif of hi own guess, and the calmnesswith which he half smilingli rub hi chin and shot intelligentgl much as if he were valu a tree, made a fine contrast withth alarm or scorn visibl in other face when the unknown mourner,whose name wa understood to be rigg, enter the wainscot parlor andtook hi seat near the door to make part of the audienc when the willshould be read. just then mr. solomon and mr. jonah were gone up-stairswith the lawyer to search for the will; and mr. waul, see twovac seat between herself and mr. borthrop trumbul, had the spiritto move next to that great author, who wa handl hi watch-sealsand trim hi outlin with a determin not to show anyth socompromis to a man of abil as wonder or surpris.“i suppos you know everyth about what my poor brother’s done, mr.trumbul,” said mr. waul, in the lowest of her woolli tone, whilesh turn her crape-shadow bonnet toward mr. trumbul’s ear.“my good ladi, whatev wa told me wa told in confid,” said theauction, put hi hand up to screen that secret.“them who’ve made sure of their good-luck mai be disappoint yet,”mr. waul continu, find some relief in thi commun.“hope ar often delus,” said mr. trumbul, still in confid.“ah!” said mr. waul, look across at the vinci, and then movingback to the side of her sister martha.“it’s wonder how close poor peter wa,” she said, in the sameunderton. “we none of us know what he might have had on hi mind. ionli hope and trust he wasn’t a wors liver than we think of, martha.”poor mr. cranch wa bulki, and, breath asthmat, had theaddit motiv for make her remark unexception and givingthem a gener bear, that even her whisper were loud and liabl tosudden burst like those of a derang barrel-organ.“i never _wa_ covet, jane,” she repli; “but i have six childrenand have buri three, and i didn’t marri into monei. the eldest, thatsit there, is but nineteen—so i leav you to guess. and stock alwaysshort, and land most awkward. but if ever i’ve beg and prai; it’sbeen to god abov; though where there’s on brother a bachelor and theother childless after twice marri—anybodi might think!”meanwhil, mr. vinci had glanc at the passiv face of mr. rigg, andhad taken out hi snuff-box and tap it, but had put it againunopen as an indulg which, howev clarifi to the judgment,wa unsuit to the occas. “i shouldn’t wonder if featherston hadbett feel than ani of us gave him credit for,” he observ, inth ear of hi wife. “thi funer show a thought about everybodi: itlook well when a man want to be follow by hi friend, and if theyar humbl, not to be asham of them. i should be all the betterpleas if he’d left lot of small legaci. thei mai be uncommonlyus to fellow in a small wai.”“everyth is as handsom as could be, crape and silk and everyth,”said mr. vinci, contentedli.but i am sorri to sai that fred wa under some difficulti in repressinga laugh, which would have been more unsuit than hi father’ssnuff-box. fred had overheard mr. jonah suggest someth about a“love-child,” and with thi thought in hi mind, the stranger’s face,which happen to be opposit him, affect him too ludicr. marygarth, discern hi distress in the twitch of hi mouth, and hisrecours to a cough, came cleverli to hi rescu by ask him tochang seat with her, so that he got into a shadowi corner. fred wasfeel as good-naturedli as possibl toward everybodi, includingrigg; and have some relent toward all these peopl who were lesslucki than he wa awar of be himself, he would not for the worldhav behav amiss; still, it wa particularli easi to laugh.but the entranc of the lawyer and the two brother drew everi on’sattent. the lawyer wa mr. standish, and he had come to stone courtthi morn believ that he knew thoroughli well who would bepleas and who disappoint befor the dai wa over. the will heexpect to read wa the last of three which he had drawn up for mr.featherston. mr. standish wa not a man who vari hi manner: hebehav with the same deep-voic, off-hand civil to everybodi, asif he saw no differ in them, and talk chiefli of the hai-crop,which would be “veri fine, by god!” of the last bulletin concerningth king, and of the duke of clarenc, who wa a sailor everi inch ofhim, and just the man to rule over an island like britain.old featherston had often reflect as he sat look at the fire thatstandish would be surpris some dai: it is true that if he had done ash like at the last, and burnt the will drawn up by anoth lawyer, hewould not have secur that minor end; still he had had hi pleasur inrumin on it. and certainli mr. standish wa surpris, but not atal sorri; on the contrari, he rather enjoi the zest of a littlecurios in hi own mind, which the discoveri of a second will addedto the prospect amaz on the part of the featherston famili.as to the sentiment of solomon and jonah, thei were held in uttersuspens: it seem to them that the old will would have a certainvalid, and that there might be such an interlac of poor peter’sformer and latter intent as to creat endless “law” beforeanybodi came by their own—an inconveni which would have at leastth advantag of go all round. henc the brother show athoroughli neutral graviti as thei re-enter with mr. standish; butsolomon took out hi white handkerchief again with a sens that in anycas there would be affect passag, and cry at funer, howeverdri, wa customarili serv up in lawn.perhap the person who felt the most throb excit at thismoment wa mari garth, in the conscious that it wa she who hadvirtu determin the product of thi second will, which mighthav moment effect on the lot of some person present. no soulexcept herself knew what had pass on that final night.“the will i hold in my hand,” said mr. standish, who, seat at thetabl in the middl of the room, took hi time about everyth,includ the cough with which he show a disposit to clear hisvoic, “wa drawn up by myself and execut by our deceas friend onth 9th of august, 1825. but i find that there is a subsequentinstru hitherto unknown to me, bear date the 20th of juli, 1826,hardli a year later than the previou on. and there is farther, ise”—mr. standish wa cautious travel over the document with hisspectacl—“a codicil to thi latter will, bear date march 1, 1828.”“dear, dear!” said sister martha, not mean to be audibl, but drivento some articul under thi pressur of date.“i shall begin by read the earlier will,” continu mr. standish,“sinc such, as appear by hi not have destroi the document, wasth intent of deceas.”the preambl wa felt to be rather long, and sever besid solomonshook their head pathet, look on the ground: all ey avoidedmeet other ey, and were chiefli fix either on the spot in thetabl-cloth or on mr. standish’s bald head; except mari garth’s.when all the rest were try to look nowher in particular, it wassaf for her to look at them. and at the sound of the first “give andbequeath” she could see all complexion chang subtli, as if somefaint vibrat were pass through them, save that of mr. rigg. hesat in unalt calm, and, in fact, the compani, preoccupi with moreimport problem, and with the complic of listen to bequestswhich might or might not be revok, had ceas to think of him. fredblush, and mr. vinci found it imposs to do without hi snuff-boxin hi hand, though he kept it close.the small bequest came first, and even the recollect that there wasanoth will and that poor peter might have thought better of it, couldnot quell the rise disgust and indign. on like to be done wellbi in everi tens, past, present, and futur. and here wa petercap five year ago of leav onli two hundr apiec to hi ownbroth and sister, and onli a hundr apiec to hi own nephew andniec: the garth were not mention, but mr. vinci and rosamond wereeach to have a hundr. mr. trumbul wa to have the gold-head caneand fifti pound; the other second cousin and the cousin present wereeach to have the like handsom sum, which, as the saturnin cousinobserv, wa a sort of legaci that left a man nowher; and there wasmuch more of such offens dribbl in favor of person notpres—problemat, and, it wa to be fear, low connect.altogeth, reckon hastili, here were about three thousand disposedof. where then had peter meant the rest of the monei to go—and whereth land? and what wa revok and what not revok—and wa therevoc for better or for wors? all emot must be condit,and might turn out to be the wrong thing. the men were strong enough tobear up and keep quiet under thi confus suspens; some let theirlow lip fall, other purs it up, accord to the habit of theirmuscl. but jane and martha sank under the rush of question, andbegan to cry; poor mr. cranch be half move with the consol ofget ani hundr at all without work for them, and half awarethat her share wa scanti; wherea mr. waul’s mind wa entirelyflood with the sens of be an own sister and get littl, whilesomebodi els wa to have much. the gener expect now wa thatth “much” would fall to fred vinci, but the vinci themselv weresurpris when ten thousand pound in specifi invest weredeclar to be bequeath to him:—wa the land come too? fred bit hislip: it wa difficult to help smile, and mr. vinci felt herself thehappiest of women—possibl revoc shrink out of sight in thisdazzl vision.there wa still a residu of person properti as well as the land, butth whole wa left to on person, and that person wa—o possibl!o expect found on the favor of “close” old gentlemen! o endlessvoc that would still leav express slip helpless from themeasur of mortal folli!—that residuari legate wa joshua rigg,who wa also sole executor, and who wa to take thenceforth the name offeatherston.there wa a rustl which seem like a shudder run round theroom. everi on stare afresh at mr. rigg, who appar experiencedno surpris.“a most singular testamentari disposit!” exclaim mr. trumbul,prefer for onc that he should be consid ignor in the past.“but there is a second will—there is a further document. we have notyet heard the final wish of the deceas.”mari garth wa feel that what thei had yet to hear were not thefin wish. the second will revok everyth except the legaci toth low person befor mention (some alter in these be theoccas of the codicil), and the bequest of all the land ly inlowick parish with all the stock and household furnitur, to joshuarigg. the residu of the properti wa to be devot to the erect andendow of almshous for old men, to be call featherston’salm-hous, and to be built on a piec of land near middlemarchalreadi bought for the purpos by the testat, he wish—so thedocu declar—to pleas god almighti. nobodi present had afarth; but mr. trumbul had the gold-head cane. it took some timefor the compani to recov the power of express. mari dare not lookat fred.mr. vinci wa the first to speak—after us hi snuff-boxenerget—and he spoke with loud indign. “the mostunaccount will i ever heard! i should sai he wa not in hi rightmind when he made it. i should sai thi last will wa void,” ad mr.vinci, feel that thi express put the thing in the true light.“eh standish?”“our deceas friend alwai knew what he wa about, i think,” said mr.standish. “everyth is quit regular. here is a letter from clemmensof brass ti with the will. he drew it up. a veri respectablesolicitor.”“i never notic ani alien of mind—ani aberr of intellect inth late mr. featherston,” said borthrop trumbul, “but i call thiswil eccentr. i wa alwai willingli of servic to the old soul; andh intim pretti plainli a sens of oblig which would showitself in hi will. the gold-head cane is farcic consid as anacknowledg to me; but happili i am abov mercenari consider.”“there’s noth veri surpris in the matter that i can see,” saidcaleb garth. “anybodi might have had more reason for wonder if thewil had been what you might expect from an open-mind straightforwardman. for my part, i wish there wa no such thing as a will.”“that’s a strang sentiment to come from a christian man, by god!” saidth lawyer. “i should like to know how you will back that up, garth!”“oh,” said caleb, lean forward, adjust hi finger-tip withniceti and look medit on the ground. it alwai seem to himthat word were the hardest part of “busi.”but here mr. jonah featherston made himself heard. “well, he alwayswa a fine hypocrit, wa my brother peter. but thi will cut outeveryth. if i’d known, a wagon and six hors shouldn’t have drawnm from brass. i’ll put a white hat and drab coat on to-morrow.”“dear, dear,” wept mr. cranch, “and we’ve been at the expens oftravel, and that poor lad sit idl here so long! it’s the firsttim i ever heard my brother peter wa so wish to pleas godalmighti; but if i wa to be struck helpless i must sai it’s hard—i canthink no other.”“it’ll do him no good where he’s gone, that’s my belief,” said solomon,with a bitter which wa remark genuin, though hi tone couldnot help be sly. “peter wa a bad liver, and almshous won’t coverit, when he’s had the impud to show it at the last.”“and all the while had got hi own law famili—brother and sistersand nephew and niec—and ha sat in church with ’em whenev hethought well to come,” said mr. waul. “and might have left hisproperti so respect, to them that’s never been us to extravaganceor unsteadi in no manner of wai—and not so poor but what thei couldhav save everi penni and made more of it. and me—the troubl i’vebeen at, time and time, to come here and be sisterli—and him withth on hi mind all the while that might make anybodi’s flesh creep.but if the almighti’s allow it, he mean to punish him for it.brother solomon, i shall be go, if you’ll drive me.”“i’ve no desir to put my foot on the premis again,” said solomon.“i’ve got land of my own and properti of my own to will awai.”“it’s a poor tale how luck goe in the world,” said jonah. “it neveransw to have a bit of spirit in you. you’d better be a dog in themang. but those abov ground might learn a lesson. on fool’s will isenough in a famili.”“there’s more wai than on of be a fool,” said solomon. “i shan’tleav my monei to be pour down the sink, and i shan’t leav it tofoundl from africai. i like featherston that were brew such,and not turn featherston with stick the name on ’em.”solomon address these remark in a loud asid to mr. waul as heros to accompani her. brother jonah felt himself capabl of much moresting wit than thi, but he reflect that there wa no us inoffend the new proprietor of stone court, until you were certainthat he wa quit without intent of hospit toward witti menwhos name he wa about to bear.mr. joshua rigg, in fact, appear to troubl himself littl about anyinnuendo, but show a notabl chang of manner, walk coolli up tomr. standish and put busi question with much cool. he hada high chirp voic and a vile accent. fred, whom he no longer movedto laughter, thought him the lowest monster he had ever seen. but fredwa feel rather sick. the middlemarch mercer wait for anopportun of engag mr. rigg in convers: there wa no knowinghow mani pair of leg the new proprietor might requir hose for, andprofit were more to be reli on than legaci. also, the mercer, as asecond cousin, wa dispassion enough to feel curios.mr. vinci, after hi on outburst, had remain proudli silent, thoughtoo much preoccupi with unpleas feel to think of move, tillh observ that hi wife had gone to fred’s side and wa cryingsil while she held her darl’s hand. he rose immedi, andturn hi back on the compani while he said to her in anunderton,—“don’t give wai, luci; don’t make a fool of yourself, mydear, befor these peopl,” he ad in hi usual loud voic—“go andord the phaeton, fred; i have no time to wast.”mari garth had befor thi been get readi to go home with herfath. she met fred in the hall, and now for the first time had thecourag to look at him. he had that wither sort of pale whichwil sometim come on young face, and hi hand wa veri cold when sheshook it. mari too wa agit; she wa consciou that fatal,without will of her own, she had perhap made a great differ tofr’s lot.“good-by,” she said, with affection sad. “be brave, fred. i dobeliev you ar better without the monei. what wa the good of it tomr. featherston?”“that’s all veri fine,” said fred, pettishli. “what is a fellow to do?i must go into the church now.” (he knew that thi would vex mari: verywel; then she must tell him what els he could do.) “and i thought ishould be abl to pai your father at onc and make everyth right.and you have not even a hundr pound left you. what shall you do now,mari?”“take anoth situat, of cours, as soon as i can get on. my fatherha enough to do to keep the rest, without me. good-by.”in a veri short time stone court wa clear of well-brewedfeatherston and other long-accustom visitor. anoth stranger hadbeen brought to settl in the neighborhood of middlemarch, but in thecas of mr. rigg featherston there wa more discont with immediatevis consequ than specul as to the effect which hispres might have in the futur. no soul wa prophet enough to haveani forebod as to what might appear on the trial of joshua rigg.and here i am natur led to reflect on the mean of elev a lowsubject. histor parallel ar remark effici in thi wai. thechief object to them is, that the dilig narrat mai lack space,or (what is often the same thing) mai not be abl to think of them withani degre of particular, though he mai have a philosophicalconfid that if known thei would be illustr. it seem an easierand shorter wai to digniti, to observ that—sinc there never wa atru stori which could not be told in parabl, where you might put amonkei for a margrav, and vice versa—whatev ha been or is to benarr by me about low peopl, mai be ennobl by be consid apar; so that if ani bad habit and ugli consequ ar broughtinto view, the reader mai have the relief of regard them as not morethan figur ungenteel, and mai feel himself virtual in companywith person of some style. thu while i tell the truth about loobi,my reader’s imagin need not be entir exclud from anoccup with lord; and the petti sum which ani bankrupt of highstand would be sorri to retir upon, mai be lift to the level ofhigh commerci transact by the inexpens addit ofproport cipher.as to ani provinci histori in which the agent ar all of high moralrank, that must be of a date long posterior to the first reform bill,and peter featherston, you perceiv, wa dead and buri some monthsbefor lord grei came into offic.chapter xxxvi.’t is strang to see the humor of these men,these great aspir spirit, that should be wise:. . . . . . . .for be the natur of great spirit to loveto be where thei mai be most emin;thei, rate of themselv so farr aboveu in conceit, with whom thei do frequent,imagin how we wonder and esteemeal that thei do or sai; which make them striveto make our admir more extrem,which thei suppos thei cannot, ’less thei givenotic of their extrem and highest thought.—daniel: _tragedi of philota_.mr. vinci went home from the read of the will with hi point of viewconsider chang in relat to mani subject. he wa anopen-mind man, but given to indirect mode of express himself:when he wa disappoint in a market for hi silk braid, he swore atth groom; when hi brother-in-law bulstrod had vex him, he madecut remark on method; and it wa now appar that he regardedfr’s idl with a sudden increas of sever, by hi throw anembroid cap out of the smoke-room on to the hall-floor.“well, sir,” he observ, when that young gentleman wa move off tobe, “i hope you’ve made up your mind now to go up next term and passyour examin. i’ve taken my resolut, so i advis you to lose notim in take your.”fred made no answer: he wa too utterli depress. twenti-four hoursago he had thought that instead of need to know what he should do,he should by thi time know that he need to do noth: that heshould hunt in pink, have a first-rate hunter, ride to cover on a finehack, and be gener respect for do so; moreov, that he shouldb abl at onc to pai mr. garth, and that mari could no longer haveani reason for not marri him. and all thi wa to have come withoutstudi or other inconveni, pure by the favor of provid in theshap of an old gentleman’s capric. but now, at the end of thetwenti-four hour, all those firm expect were upset. it wa“rather hard line” that while he wa smart under thisdisappoint he should be treat as if he could have help it. buth went awai silent and hi mother plead for him.“don’t be hard on the poor boi, vinci. he’ll turn out well yet, thoughthat wick man ha deceiv him. i feel as sure as i sit here, fredwil turn out well—els why wa he brought back from the brink of thegrav? and i call it a robberi: it wa like give him the land, topromis it; and what is promis, if make everybodi believ is notpromis? and you see he did leav him ten thousand pound, and thentook it awai again.”“took it awai again!” said mr. vinci, pettishli. “i tell you the lad’san unlucki lad, luci. and you’ve alwai spoil him.”“well, vinci, he wa my first, and you made a fine fuss with him whenh came. you were as proud as proud,” said mr. vinci, easilyrecov her cheer smile.“who know what babi will turn to? i wa fool enough, i dare sai,”said the husband—more mildli, howev.“but who ha handsom, better children than our? fred is far beyondoth peopl’s son: you mai hear it in hi speech, that he ha keptcolleg compani. and rosamond—where is there a girl like her? she mightstand besid ani ladi in the land, and onli look the better for it. youse—mr. lydgat ha kept the highest compani and been everywher, andh fell in love with her at onc. not but what i could have wishedrosamond had not engag herself. she might have met somebodi on avisit who would have been a far better match; i mean at herschoolfellow miss willoughbi’s. there ar relat in that familyquit as high as mr. lydgat’s.”“damn relat!” said mr. vinci; “i’ve had enough of them. i don’twant a son-in-law who ha got noth but hi relat to recommendhim.”“why, my dear,” said mr. vinci, “you seem as pleas as could beabout it. it’s true, i wasn’t at home; but rosamond told me you hadn’ta word to sai against the engag. and she ha begun to bui in thebest linen and cambric for her undercloth.”“not by my will,” said mr. vinci. “i shall have enough to do thi year,with an idl scamp of a son, without pai for wed-cloth. thetim ar as tight as can be; everybodi is be ruin; and i don’tbeliev lydgat ha got a farth. i shan’t give my consent to theirmarri. let ’em wait, as their elder have done befor ’em.”“rosamond will take it hard, vinci, and you know you never could bearto cross her.”“ye, i could. the sooner the engag’s off, the better. i don’tbeliev he’ll ever make an incom, the wai he goe on. he makesenemi; that’s all i hear of hi make.”“but he stand veri high with mr. bulstrod, my dear. the marriagewould pleas _him_, i should think.”“pleas the deuc!” said mr. vinci. “bulstrod won’t pai for theirkeep. and if lydgat think i’m go to give monei for them to set uphousekeep, he’s mistaken, that’s all. i expect i shall have to putdown my hors soon. you’d better tell rosi what i sai.”thi wa a not infrequ procedur with mr. vinci—to be rash in jovialass, and on becom subsequ consciou that he had been rash,to emploi other in make the offens retract. howev, mr.vinci, who never willingli oppos her husband, lost no time the nextmorn in let rosamond know what he had said. rosamond, examiningsom muslin-work, listen in silenc, and at the end gave a certainturn of her grace neck, of which onli long experi could teachyou that it meant perfect obstinaci.“what do you sai, my dear?” said her mother, with affectionatedefer.“papa doe not mean anyth of the kind,” said rosamond, quit calmli.“he ha alwai said that he wish me to marri the man i love. and ishal marri mr. lydgat. it is seven week now sinc papa gave hiscons. and i hope we shall have mr. bretton’s hous.”“well, my dear, i shall leav you to manag your papa. you alwai domanag everybodi. but if we ever do go and get damask, sadler’s is theplac—far better than hopkin’s. mr. bretton’s is veri larg, though:i should love you to have such a hous; but it will take a great dealof furnitur—carpet and everyth, besid plate and glass. and youhear, your papa sai he will give no monei. do you think mr. lydgateexpect it?”“you cannot imagin that i should ask him, mamma. of cours heunderstand hi own affair.”“but he mai have been look for monei, my dear, and we all thought ofyour have a pretti legaci as well as fred;—and now everyth is sodread—there’s no pleasur in think of anyth, with that poorboi disappoint as he is.”“that ha noth to do with my marriag, mamma. fred must leav offb idl. i am go up-stair to take thi work to miss morgan: shedo the open hem veri well. mari garth might do some work for menow, i should think. her sew is exquisit; it is the nicest thing iknow about mari. i should so like to have all my cambric frillingdoubl-hem. and it take a long time.”mr. vinci’s belief that rosamond could manag her papa wa wellfound. apart from hi dinner and hi cours, mr. vinci, blusteringa he wa, had as littl of hi own wai as if he had been a primeminist: the forc of circumst wa easili too much for him, as iti for most pleasur-love florid men; and the circumst calledrosamond wa particularli forcibl by mean of that mild persistencewhich, as we know, enabl a white soft live substanc to make itswai in spite of oppos rock. papa wa not a rock: he had no otherfix than that fixiti of altern impuls sometim call habit,and thi wa altogeth unfavor to hi take the onli decisivelin of conduct in relat to hi daughter’s engag—name, toinquir thoroughli into lydgat’s circumst, declar hi ownin to furnish monei, and forbid alik either a speedi marriageor an engag which must be too lengthi. that seem veri simpl andeasi in the statement; but a disagre resolv form in the chillhour of the morn had as mani condit against it as the earlyfrost, and rare persist under the warm influenc of the dai.the indirect though emphat express of opinion to which mr. vincywa prone suffer much restraint in thi case: lydgat wa a proud mantoward whom innuendo were obvious unsaf, and throw hi hat onth floor wa out of the question. mr. vinci wa a littl in aw ofhim, a littl vain that he want to marri rosamond, a littleindispos to rais a question of monei in which hi own posit wasnot advantag, a littl afraid of be worst in dialogu with aman better educ and more highli bred than himself, and a littleafraid of do what hi daughter would not like. the part mr. vincypref plai wa that of the gener host whom nobodi criticis.in the earlier half of the dai there wa busi to hinder ani formalcommun of an advers resolv; in the later there wa dinner,wine, whist, and gener satisfact. and in the mean while the hourswer each leav their littl deposit and gradual form the finalreason for inact, name, that action wa too late. the acceptedlov spent most of hi even in lowick gate, and a love-make notat all depend on monei-advanc from father-in-law, or prospectiveincom from a profess, went on flourishingli under mr. vinci’s owney. young love-make—that gossam web! even the point it clingsto—the thing whenc it subtl interlac ar swung—ar scarcelypercept: momentari touch of fingertip, meet of rai fromblu and dark orb, unfinish phrase, lightest chang of cheek andlip, faintest tremor. the web itself is made of spontan beliefsand indefin joi, yearn of on life toward anoth, vision ofcomplet, indefinit trust. and lydgat fell to spin that webfrom hi inward self with wonder rapid, in spite of experiencesuppos to be finish off with the drama of laur—in spite too ofmedicin and biologi; for the inspect of macer muscl or of eyespres in a dish (like santa lucia’s), and other incid ofscientif inquiri, ar observ to be less incompat with poeticlov than a nativ dul or a live addict to the lowest prose.as for rosamond, she wa in the water-lili’s expand wonder atit own fuller life, and she too wa spin industri at themutu web. all thi went on in the corner of the draw-room whereth piano stood, and subtl as it wa, the light made it a sort ofrainbow visibl to mani observ besid mr. farebroth. thecertainti that miss vinci and mr. lydgat were engag becam generalin middlemarch without the aid of formal announc.aunt bulstrod wa again stir to anxieti; but thi time sheaddress herself to her brother, go to the warehous expressli toavoid mr. vinci’s volatil. hi repli were not satisfactori.“walter, you never mean to tell me that you have allow all thi to goon without inquiri into mr. lydgat’s prospect?” said mr. bulstrod,open her ey with wider graviti at her brother, who wa in hispeevish warehous humor. “think of thi girl brought up in luxuri—intoo worldli a wai, i am sorri to sai—what will she do on a smallincom?”“oh, confound it, harriet! what can i do when men come into the townwithout ani ask of mine? did you shut your hous up against lydgat?bulstrod ha push him forward more than anybodi. i never made anyfuss about the young fellow. you should go and talk to your husbandabout it, not me.”“well, realli, walter, how can mr. bulstrod be to blame? i am sure hedid not wish for the engag.”“oh, if bulstrod had not taken him by the hand, i should never haveinvit him.”“but you call him in to attend on fred, and i am sure that wa amerci,” said mr. bulstrod, lose her clew in the intricaci of thesubject.“i don’t know about merci,” said mr. vinci, testili. “i know i amworri more than i like with my famili. i wa a good brother to you,harriet, befor you marri bulstrod, and i must sai he doesn’t alwaysshow that friendli spirit toward your famili that might have beenexpect of him.” mr. vinci wa veri littl like a jesuit, but noaccomplish jesuit could have turn a question more adroitli. harriethad to defend her husband instead of blame her brother, and theconvers end at a point as far from the begin as some recentspar between the brother-in-law at a vestri meet.mr. bulstrod did not repeat her brother’s complaint to her husband,but in the even she spoke to him of lydgat and rosamond. he did notshar her warm interest, howev; and onli spoke with resign ofth risk attend on the begin of medic practic and thedesir of prudenc.“i am sure we ar bound to prai for that thoughtless girl—brought up assh ha been,” said mr. bulstrod, wish to rous her husband’sfeel.“truli, my dear,” said mr. bulstrod, assentingli. “those who ar notof thi world can do littl els to arrest the error of theobstin worldli. that is what we must accustom ourselv torecogn with regard to your brother’s famili. i could have wishedthat mr. lydgat had not enter into such a union; but my relationswith him ar limit to that us of hi gift for god’s purpos whichi taught us by the divin govern under each dispens.”mr. bulstrod said no more, attribut some dissatisfact which shefelt to her own want of spiritu. she believ that her husband wason of those men whose memoir should be written when thei di.as to lydgat himself, have been accept, he wa prepar to acceptal the consequ which he believ himself to forese with perfectclear. of cours he must be marri in a year—perhap even in halfa year. thi wa not what he had intend; but other scheme would notb hinder: thei would simpli adjust themselv anew. marriag, ofcours, must be prepar for in the usual wai. a hous must be takeninstead of the room he at present occupi; and lydgat, have heardrosamond speak with admir of old mr. bretton’s hous (situat inlowick gate), took notic when it fell vacant after the old ladi’sdeath, and immedi enter into treati for it.he did thi in an episod wai, veri much as he gave order to histailor for everi requisit of perfect dress, without ani notion ofb extravag. on the contrari, he would have despis anyostent of expens; hi profess had familiar him with allgrad of poverti, and he care much for those who suffer hardship.he would have behav perfectli at a tabl where the sauc wa servedin a jug with the handl off, and he would have rememb nothingabout a grand dinner except that a man wa there who talk well. butit had never occur to him that he should live in ani other than whath would have call an ordinari wai, with green glass for hock, andexcel wait at tabl. in warm himself at french socialtheori he had brought awai no smell of scorch. we mai handl evenextrem opinion with impun while our furnitur, our dinner-give,and prefer for armori bear in our own case, link usindissolubl with the establish order. and lydgat’s tendenc wa nottoward extrem opinion: he would have like no barefoot doctrin,be particular about hi boot: he wa no radic in relat toanyth but medic reform and the prosecut of discoveri. in therest of practic life he walk by hereditari habit; half from thatperson pride and unreflect egoism which i have alreadi calledcommon, and half from that naivet which belong to preoccupationwith favorit idea.ani inward debat lydgat had as to the consequ of thi engagementwhich had stolen upon him, turn on the pauciti of time rather than ofmonei. certainli, be in love and be expect continu by someon who alwai turn out to be prettier than memori could representh to be, did interfer with the dilig us of spare hour whichmight serv some “plod fellow of a german” to make the great,immin discoveri. thi wa realli an argument for not defer themarriag too long, as he impli to mr. farebroth, on dai that thevicar came to hi room with some pond-product which he want toexamin under a better microscop than hi own, and, find lydgat’stabl of apparatu and specimen in confus, said sarcast—“ero ha degener; he began by introduc order and harmoni, andnow he bring back chao.”“ye, at some stage,” said lydgat, lift hi brow and smile,while he began to arrang hi microscop. “but a better order willbegin after.”“soon?” said the vicar.“i hope so, realli. thi unsettl state of affair us up the time,and when on ha notion in scienc, everi moment is an opportun. ifeel sure that marriag must be the best thing for a man who want towork steadili. he ha everyth at home then—no teas with personalspecul—he can get calm and freedom.”“you ar an enviabl dog,” said the vicar, “to have such aprospect—rosamond, calm and freedom, all to your share. here am iwith noth but my pipe and pond-animalcul. now, ar you readi?”lydgat did not mention to the vicar anoth reason he had for wishingto shorten the period of courtship. it wa rather irrit to him,even with the wine of love in hi vein, to be oblig to mingl sooften with the famili parti at the vinci’, and to enter so much intomiddlemarch gossip, protract good cheer, whist-plai, and generalfutil. he had to be deferenti when mr. vinci decid questionswith trenchant ignor, especi as to those liquor which were thebest inward pickl, preserv you from the effect of bad air. mr.vinci’s open and simplic were quit unstreak with suspicion asto the subtl offenc she might give to the tast of her intendedson-in-law; and altogeth lydgat had to confess to himself that hewa descend a littl in relat to rosamond’s famili. but thatexquisit creatur herself suffer in the same sort of wai:—it wa atleast on delight thought that in marri her, he could give her amuch-need transplant.“dear!” he said to her on even, in hi gentlest tone, as he satdown by her and look close at her face—but i must first sai that he had found her alon in the draw-room,where the great old-fashion window, almost as larg as the side ofth room, wa open to the summer scent of the garden at the back ofth hous. her father and mother were gone to a parti, and the restwer all out with the butterfli.“dear! your eyelid ar red.”“ar thei?” said rosamond. “i wonder why.” it wa not in her natur topour forth wish or grievanc. thei onli came forth gracefulli onsolicit.“as if you could hide it from me!” said lydgat, lai hi handtenderli on both of her. “don’t i see a tini drop on on of thelash? thing troubl you, and you don’t tell me. that is unlov.”“why should i tell you what you cannot alter? thei ar everi-dayth:—perhap thei have been a littl wors late.”“famili annoy. don’t fear speak. i guess them.”“papa ha been more irrit late. fred make him angri, and thismorn there wa a fresh quarrel becaus fred threaten to throw hiswhol educ awai, and do someth quit beneath him. and besid—”rosamond hesit, and her cheek were gather a slight flush.lydgat had never seen her in troubl sinc the morn of theirengag, and he had never felt so passion toward her as atthi moment. he kiss the hesit lip gentli, as if to encouragethem.“i feel that papa is not quit pleas about our engag,” rosamondcontinu, almost in a whisper; “and he said last night that he shouldcertainli speak to you and sai it must be given up.”“will you give it up?” said lydgat, with quick energi—almost angrili.“i never give up anyth that i choos to do,” said rosamond,recov her calm at the touch of thi chord.“god bless you!” said lydgat, kiss her again. thi constanc ofpurpos in the right place wa ador. he went on:—“it is too late now for your father to sai that our engag must begiven up. you ar of ag, and i claim you as mine. if anyth is doneto make you unhappi,—that is a reason for hasten our marriag.”an unmistak delight shone forth from the blue ey that met hi,and the radianc seem to light up all hi futur with mild sunshin.ideal happi (of the kind known in the arabian night, in which youar invit to step from the labor and discord of the street into aparadis where everyth is given to you and noth claim) seemedto be an affair of a few week’ wait, more or less.“why should we defer it?” he said, with ardent insist. “i havetaken the hous now: everyth els can soon be got readi—can it not?you will not mind about new cloth. those can be bought afterward.”“what origin notion you clever men have!” said rosamond, dimplingwith more thorough laughter than usual at thi humor incongru.“thi is the first time i ever heard of wed-cloth be boughtaft marriag.”“but you don’t mean to sai you would insist on my wait month forth sake of cloth?” said lydgat, half think that rosamond wastor him prettili, and half fear that she realli shrank fromspeedi marriag. “rememb, we ar look forward to a better sort ofhappi even than thi—be continu togeth, independ ofoth, and order our live as we will. come, dear, tell me how soonyou can be altogeth mine.”there wa a seriou plead in lydgat’s tone, as if he felt that shewould be injur him by ani fantast delai. rosamond becam serioustoo, and slightli medit; in fact, she wa go through manyintricaci of lace-edg and hosieri and petticoat-tuck, in orderto give an answer that would at least be approxim.“six week would be ampl—sai so, rosamond,” insist lydgat,releas her hand to put hi arm gentli round her.on littl hand immedi went to pat her hair, while she gave herneck a medit turn, and then said serious—“there would be the hous-linen and the furnitur to be prepar.still, mamma could see to those while we were awai.”“ye, to be sure. we must be awai a week or so.”“oh, more than that!” said rosamond, earnestli. she wa think of hereven dress for the visit to sir godwin lydgat’s, which she hadlong been secretli hope for as a delight employ of at leaston quarter of the honeymoon, even if she defer her introduct toth uncl who wa a doctor of divin (also a pleas though soberkind of rank, when sustain by blood). she look at her lover withsom wonder remonstr as she spoke, and he readili understoodthat she might wish to lengthen the sweet time of doubl solitud.“whatev you wish, my darl, when the dai is fix. but let us takea decid cours, and put an end to ani discomfort you mai besuff. six week!—i am sure thei would be ampl.”“i could certainli hasten the work,” said rosamond. “will you, then,mention it to papa?—i think it would be better to write to him.” sheblush and look at him as the garden flower look at us when we walkforth happili among them in the transcend even light: is therenot a soul beyond utter, half nymph, half child, in those delicatepet which glow and breath about the centr of deep color?he touch her ear and a littl bit of neck under it with hi lip, andthei sat quit still for mani minut which flow by them like a smallgurgl brook with the kiss of the sun upon it. rosamond thoughtthat no on could be more in love than she wa; and lydgat thoughtthat after all hi wild mistak and absurd credul, he had foundperfect womanhood—felt as if alreadi breath upon by exquisit weddedaffect such as would be bestow by an accomplish creatur whovener hi high muse and moment labor and would neverinterfer with them; who would creat order in the home and accountswith still magic, yet keep her finger readi to touch the lute andtransform life into romanc at ani moment; who wa instruct to thetru womanli limit and not a hair’s-breadth beyond—docil, therefor,and readi to carri out behest which came from that limit. it wasplain now than ever that hi notion of remain much longer abachelor had been a mistak: marriag would not be an obstruct but afurther. and happen the next dai to accompani a patient tobrass, he saw a dinner-servic there which struck him as so exactlyth right thing that he bought it at onc. it save time to do theseth just when you thought of them, and lydgat hate ugli crockeri.the dinner-servic in question wa expens, but that might be in thenatur of dinner-servic. furnish wa necessarili expens; butthen it had to be done onli onc.“it must be love,” said mr. vinci, when lydgat mention hispurchas with some descript touch. “just what rosi ought to have.i trust in heaven it won’t be broken!”“on must hire servant who will not break thing,” said lydgat.(certainli, thi wa reason with an imperfect vision of sequenc.but at that period there wa no sort of reason which wa not more orless sanction by men of scienc.)of cours it wa unnecessari to defer the mention of anyth to mamma,who did not readili take view that were not cheer, and be ahappi wife herself, had hardli ani feel but pride in her daughter’smarriag. but rosamond had good reason for suggest to lydgat thatpapa should be appeal to in write. she prepar for the arriv ofth letter by walk with her papa to the warehous the next morn,and tell him on the wai that mr. lydgat wish to be marri soon.“nonsens, my dear!” said mr. vinci. “what ha he got to marri on?you’d much better give up the engag. i’ve told you so prettyplainli befor thi. what have you had such an educ for, if youar to go and marri a poor man? it’s a cruel thing for a father tose.”“mr. lydgat is not poor, papa. he bought mr. peacock’s practic,which, thei sai, is worth eight or nine hundr a-year.”“stuff and nonsens! what’s bui a practic? he might as well buynext year’s swallow. it’ll all slip through hi finger.”“on the contrari, papa, he will increas the practic. see how he hasbeen call in by the chettam and casaubon.”“i hope he know i shan’t give anyth—with thi disappoint aboutfr, and parliament go to be dissolv, and machin-breakingeverywher, and an elect come on—”“dear papa! what can that have to do with my marriag?”“a pretti deal to do with it! we mai all be ruin for what i know—thecountri’s in that state! some sai it’s the end of the world, and behang if i don’t think it look like it! anyhow, it’s not a time form to be draw monei out of my busi, and i should wish lydgat toknow that.”“i am sure he expect noth, papa. and he ha such veri highconnect: he is sure to rise in on wai or anoth. he is engag inmak scientif discoveri.”mr. vinci wa silent.“i cannot give up my onli prospect of happi, papa. mr. lydgat is agentleman. i could never love ani on who wa not a perfect gentleman.you would not like me to go into a consumpt, as arabella hawlei did.and you know that i never chang my mind.”again papa wa silent.“promis me, papa, that you will consent to what we wish. we shallnev give each other up; and you know that you have alwai object tolong courtship and late marriag.”there wa a littl more urgenc of thi kind, till mr. vinci said,“well, well, child, he must write to me first befor i can answerhim,”—and rosamond wa certain that she had gain her point.mr. vinci’s answer consist chiefli in a demand that lydgat shouldinsur hi life—a demand immedi conced. thi wa a delightfullyreassur idea suppos that lydgat di, but in the mean time not aself-support idea. howev, it seem to make everyth comfortableabout rosamond’s marriag; and the necessari purchas went on withmuch spirit. not without prudenti consider, howev. a bride(who is go to visit at a baronet’s) must have a few first-ratepocket-handkerchief; but beyond the absolut necessari half-dozen,rosamond content herself without the veri highest style of embroideryand valencienn. lydgat also, find that hi sum of eight hundredpound had been consider reduc sinc he had come to middlemarch,restrain hi inclin for some plate of an old pattern which wasshown to him when he went into kibbl’s establish at brass tobui fork and spoon. he wa too proud to act as if he presuppos thatmr. vinci would advanc monei to provid furnitur; and though, sinceit would not be necessari to pai for everyth at onc, some billswould be left stand over, he did not wast time in conjectur howmuch hi father-in-law would give in the form of dowri, to make paymenteasi. he wa not go to do anyth extravag, but the requisiteth must be bought, and it would be bad economi to bui them of apoor qualiti. all these matter were by the bye. lydgat foresaw thatscienc and hi profess were the object he should alon pursueenthusiast; but he could not imagin himself pursu them insuch a home as wrench had—the door all open, the oil-cloth worn, thechildren in soil pinafor, and lunch linger in the form of bone,black-handl knive, and willow-pattern. but wrench had a wretchedlymphat wife who made a mummi of herself indoor in a larg shawl;and he must have altogeth begun with an ill-chosen domesticapparatu.rosamond, howev, wa on her side much occupi with conjectur,though her quick imit percept warn her against betrai themtoo crude.“i shall like so much to know your famili,” she said on dai, when thewed journei wa be discuss. “we might perhap take a directionthat would allow us to see them as we return. which of your uncl doyou like best?”“oh,—my uncl godwin, i think. he is a good-natur old fellow.”“you were constantli at hi hous at quallingham, when you were a boi,were you not? i should so like to see the old spot and everyth youwer us to. doe he know you ar go to be marri?”“no,” said lydgat, carelessli, turn in hi chair and rub hishair up.“do send him word of it, you naughti unduti nephew. he will perhapsask you to take me to quallingham; and then you could show me about theground, and i could imagin you there when you were a boi. rememb,you see me in my home, just as it ha been sinc i wa a child. it isnot fair that i should be so ignor of your. but perhap you wouldb a littl asham of me. i forgot that.”lydgat smile at her tenderli, and realli accept the suggest thatth proud pleasur of show so charm a bride wa worth sometroubl. and now he came to think of it, he would like to see the oldspot with rosamond.“i will write to him, then. but my cousin ar bore.”it seem magnific to rosamond to be abl to speak so slightingli ofa baronet’s famili, and she felt much content in the prospect ofb abl to estim them contemptu on her own account.but mamma wa near spoil all, a dai or two later, by sai—“i hope your uncl sir godwin will not look down on rosi, mr. lydgat.i should think he would do someth handsom. a thousand or two can benoth to a baronet.”“mamma!” said rosamond, blush deepli; and lydgat piti her so muchthat he remain silent and went to the other end of the room toexamin a print curious, as if he had been absent-mind. mamma had alittl filial lectur afterward, and wa docil as usual. but rosamondreflect that if ani of those high-bred cousin who were bore, shouldb induc to visit middlemarch, thei would see mani thing in her ownfamili which might shock them. henc it seem desir that lydgateshould by-and-by get some first-rate posit elsewher than inmiddlemarch; and thi could hardli be difficult in the case of a manwho had a titl uncl and could make discoveri. lydgat, youperc, had talk fervidli to rosamond of hi hope as to thehighest us of hi life, and had found it delight to be listen tobi a creatur who would bring him the sweet further of satisfyingaffect—beauti—repos—such help as our thought get from the summerski and the flower-fring meadow.lydgat reli much on the psycholog differ between what forth sake of varieti i will call goos and gander: especi on theinnat submiss of the goos as beautifulli correspond to thestrength of the gander.chapter xxxvii.thrice happi she that is so well assuredunto herself and settl so in heartthat neither will for better be alluredn fear to wors with ani chanc to start,but like a steddi ship doth strongli partth rage wave and keep her cours aright;ne aught for tempest doth from it depart,ne aught for fairer weather’s fals delight.such self-assur need not fear the spightof grudg foe; ne favour seek of friend;but in the stai of her own stedfast mightneith to on herself nor other bend. most happi she that most assur doth rest, but he most happi who such on love best.—spenser.the doubt hint by mr. vinci whether it were onli the gener electionor the end of the world that wa come on, now that georg the fourthwa dead, parliament dissolv, wellington and peel generallydepreci and the new king apologet, wa a feebl type of theuncertainti in provinci opinion at that time. with the glow-wormlight of countri place, how could men see which were their ownthought in the confus of a tori ministri pass liber measur,of tori nobl and elector be anxiou to return liber ratherthan friend of the recreant minist, and of outcri for remedieswhich seem to have a mysteri remot bear on privat interest,and were made suspici by the advocaci of disagre neighbor?buyer of the middlemarch newspap found themselv in an anomalousposit: dure the agit on the cathol question mani had givenup the “pioneer”—which had a motto from charl jame fox and wa inth van of progress—becaus it had taken peel’s side about the papist,and had thu blot it liber with a toler of jesuitri andbaal; but thei were ill-satisfi with the “trumpet,” which—sinc itsblast against rome, and in the gener flaccid of the public mind(nobodi know who would support whom)—had becom feebl in itsblow.it wa a time, accord to a notic articl in the “pioneer,” whenth cry need of the countri might well counteract a reluct topubl action on the part of men whose mind had from long experienceacquir breadth as well as concentr, decis of judgment as wella toler, dispassion as well as energi—in fact, all thosequ which in the melancholi experi of mankind have been theleast dispos to share lodg.mr. hackbutt, whose fluent speech wa at that time float more widelythan usual, and leav much uncertainti as to it ultim channel,wa heard to sai in mr. hawlei’s offic that the articl in question“eman” from brook of tipton, and that brook had secretli boughtth “pioneer” some month ago.“that mean mischief, eh?” said mr. hawlei. “he’s got the freak ofb a popular man now, after dangl about like a strai tortois. somuch the wors for him. i’ve had my ey on him for some time. he shallb prettili pump upon. he’s a damn bad landlord. what busi hasan old counti man to come curri favor with a low set of dark-bluefreemen? as to hi paper, i onli hope he mai do the write himself. itwould be worth our pai for.”“i understand he ha got a veri brilliant young fellow to edit it, whocan write the highest style of lead articl, quit equal to anythingin the london paper. and he mean to take veri high ground on reform.”“let brook reform hi rent-roll. he’s a curs old screw, and thebuild all over hi estat ar go to rack. i suppos thi youngfellow is some loos fish from london.”“hi name is ladislaw. he is said to be of foreign extract.”“i know the sort,” said mr. hawlei; “some emissari. he’ll begin withflourish about the right of man and end with murder a wench.that’s the style.”“you must conced that there ar abus, hawlei,” said mr. hackbutt,forese some polit disagr with hi famili lawyer. “imyself should never favor immoder view—in fact i take my stand withhuskisson—but i cannot blind myself to the consider that thenon-represent of larg town—”“larg town be damn!” said mr. hawlei, impati of exposit. “iknow a littl too much about middlemarch elect. let ’em quash everypocket borough to-morrow, and bring in everi mushroom town in thekingdom—thei’ll onli increas the expens of get into parliament. igo upon fact.”mr. hawlei’s disgust at the notion of the “pioneer” be edit by anemissari, and of brook becom activ polit—as if a tortois ofdesultori pursuit should protrud it small head ambiti andbecom rampant—wa hardli equal to the annoy felt by some membersof mr. brook’s own famili. the result had ooz forth gradual, liketh discoveri that your neighbor ha set up an unpleas kind ofmanufactur which will be perman under your nostril without legalremedi. the “pioneer” had been secretli bought even befor willladislaw’s arriv, the expect opportun have offer itself inth readi of the proprietor to part with a valuabl properti whichdid not pai; and in the interv sinc mr. brook had written hisinvit, those germin idea of make hi mind tell upon the worldat larg which had been present in him from hi younger year, but hadhitherto lain in some obstruct, had been sprout under cover.the develop wa much further by a delight in hi guest whichprov greater even than he had anticip. for it seem that willwa not onli at home in all those artist and literari subject whichmr. brook had gone into at on time, but that he wa strikingli readyat seiz the point of the polit situat, and deal with themin that larg spirit which, aid by adequ memori, lend itself toquot and gener effect of treatment.“he seem to me a kind of shellei, you know,” mr. brook took anopportun of sai, for the gratif of mr. casaubon. “i don’tmean as to anyth objection—laxiti or atheism, or anyth ofthat kind, you know—ladislaw’s sentiment in everi wai i am sure aregood—inde, we were talk a great deal togeth last night. but heha the same sort of enthusiasm for liberti, freedom, emancip—afin thing under guidanc—under guidanc, you know. i think i shall beabl to put him on the right tack; and i am the more pleas becaus hei a relat of your, casaubon.”if the right tack impli anyth more precis than the rest of mr.brook’s speech, mr. casaubon silent hope that it refer to someoccup at a great distanc from lowick. he had dislik will whileh help him, but he had begun to dislik him still more now that willhad declin hi help. that is the wai with us when we have ani uneasyjealousi in our disposit: if our talent ar chiefli of theburrow kind, our honei-sip cousin (whom we have grave reasonsfor object to) is like to have a secret contempt for us, and anyon who admir him pass an obliqu critic on ourselv. havingth scrupl of rectitud in our soul, we ar abov the mean ofinjur him—rather we meet all hi claim on us by activ benefit;and the draw of chequ for him, be a superior which he mustrecogn, give our bitter a milder infus. now mr. casaubon hadbeen depriv of that superior (as anyth more than a remembr)in a sudden, caprici manner. hi antipathi to will did not springfrom the common jealousi of a winter-worn husband: it wa somethingdeep, bred by hi lifelong claim and discont; but dorothea, nowthat she wa present—dorothea, as a young wife who herself had shown anoffens capabl of critic, necessarili gave concentr toth uneasi which had befor been vagu.will ladislaw on hi side felt that hi dislik wa flourish at theexpens of hi gratitud, and spent much inward discours in justifyingth dislik. casaubon hate him—he knew that veri well; on hi firstentr he could discern a bitter in the mouth and a venom in theglanc which would almost justifi declar war in spite of pastbenefit. he wa much oblig to casaubon in the past, but realli theact of marri thi wife wa a set-off against the oblig. it wasa question whether gratitud which refer to what is done for on’sself ought not to give wai to indign at what is done againstanoth. and casaubon had done a wrong to dorothea in marri her. aman wa bound to know himself better than that, and if he chose to growgrai crunch bone in a cavern, he had no busi to be lure agirl into hi companionship. “it is the most horribl ofvirgin-sacrific,” said will; and he paint to himself what weredorothea’s inward sorrow as if he had been write a choric wail. buth would never lose sight of her: he would watch over her—if he gave upeveryth els in life he would watch over her, and she should knowthat she had on slave in the world. will had—to us sir thomasbrown’s phrase—a “passion prodig” of statement both to himselfand other. the simpl truth wa that noth then invit him sostrongli as the presenc of dorothea.invit of the formal kind had been want, howev, for will hadnev been ask to go to lowick. mr. brook, inde, confid ofdo everyth agreeabl which casaubon, poor fellow, wa too muchabsorb to think of, had arrang to bring ladislaw to lowick severaltim (not neglect meanwhil to introduc him elsewher on everyopportun as “a young rel of casaubon’s”). and though will hadnot seen dorothea alon, their interview had been enough to restoreh former sens of young companionship with on who wa clever thanherself, yet seem readi to be swai by her. poor dorothea befor hermarriag had never found much room in other mind for what she caredmost to sai; and she had not, as we know, enjoi her husband’ssuperior instruct so much as she had expect. if she spoke with anykeen of interest to mr. casaubon, he heard her with an air ofpati as if she had given a quotat from the delectu familiar tohim from hi tender year, and sometim mention curtli what ancientsect or personag had held similar idea, as if there were too muchof that sort in stock alreadi; at other time he would inform her thatsh wa mistaken, and reassert what her remark had question.but will ladislaw alwai seem to see more in what she said than sheherself saw. dorothea had littl vaniti, but she had the ardent woman’sneed to rule benefic by make the joi of anoth soul. henc themer chanc of see will occasion wa like a lunett open inth wall of her prison, give her a glimps of the sunni air; and thispleasur began to nullifi her origin alarm at what her husband mightthink about the introduct of will as her uncl’s guest. on thissubject mr. casaubon had remain dumb.but will want to talk with dorothea alon, and wa impati of slowcircumst. howev slight the terrestri intercours between danteand beatric or petrarch and laura, time chang the proport ofth, and in later dai it is prefer to have fewer sonnet andmor convers. necess excus stratagem, but stratagem waslimit by the dread of offend dorothea. he found out at last thath want to take a particular sketch at lowick; and on morn whenmr. brook had to drive along the lowick road on hi wai to the countytown, will ask to be set down with hi sketch-book and camp-stool atlowick, and without announc himself at the manor settl himself tosketch in a posit where he must see dorothea if she came out towalk—and he knew that she usual walk an hour in the morn.but the stratagem wa defeat by the weather. cloud gather withtreacher quick, the rain came down, and will wa oblig to takeshelt in the hous. he intend, on the strength of relationship, togo into the draw-room and wait there without be announc; andse hi old acquaint the butler in the hall, he said, “don’tmention that i am here, pratt; i will wait till luncheon; i know mr.casaubon doe not like to be disturb when he is in the librari.”“master is out, sir; there’s onli mr. casaubon in the librari. i’dbetter tell her you’re here, sir,” said pratt, a red-cheek man givento live convers with tantripp, and often agre with her that itmust be dull for madam.“oh, veri well; thi confound rain ha hinder me from sketch,”said will, feel so happi that he affect indiffer withdelight eas.in anoth minut he wa in the librari, and dorothea wa meet himwith her sweet unconstrain smile.“mr. casaubon ha gone to the archdeacon’s,” she said, at onc. “idon’t know whether he will be at home again long befor dinner. he wasuncertain how long he should be. did you want to sai anythingparticular to him?”“no; i came to sketch, but the rain drove me in. els i would not havedisturb you yet. i suppos that mr. casaubon wa here, and i know hedislik interrupt at thi hour.”“i am indebt to the rain, then. i am so glad to see you.” dorotheautt these common word with the simpl sincer of an unhappychild, visit at school.“i realli came for the chanc of see you alon,” said will,mysteri forc to be just as simpl as she wa. he could not stayto ask himself, why not? “i want to talk about thing, as we did inrom. it alwai make a differ when other peopl ar present.”“ye,” said dorothea, in her clear full tone of assent. “sit down.” sheseat herself on a dark ottoman with the brown book behind her,look in her plain dress of some thin woollen-white materi, withouta singl ornament on her besid her wed-ring, as if she were undera vow to be differ from all other women; and will sat down oppositeh at two yard’ distanc, the light fall on hi bright curl anddel but rather petul profil, with it defiant curv of lipand chin. each look at the other as if thei had been two flowerswhich had open then and there. dorothea for the moment forgot herhusband’s mysteri irrit against will: it seem fresh water ather thirsti lip to speak without fear to the on person whom she hadfound recept; for in look backward through sad sheexagger a past solac.“i have often thought that i should like to talk to you again,” shesaid, immedi. “it seem strang to me how mani thing i said toyou.”“i rememb them all,” said will, with the unspeak content in hissoul of feel that he wa in the presenc of a creatur worthi to beperfectli love. i think hi own feel at that moment were perfect,for we mortal have our divin moment, when love is satisfi in thecomplet of the belov object.“i have tri to learn a great deal sinc we were in rome,” saiddorothea. “i can read latin a littl, and i am begin to understandjust a littl greek. i can help mr. casaubon better now. i can find outrefer for him and save hi ey in mani wai. but it is verydifficult to be learn; it seem as if peopl were worn out on the wayto great thought, and can never enjoi them becaus thei ar tootir.”“if a man ha a capac for great thought, he is like to overtakethem befor he is decrepit,” said will, with irrepress quick.but through certain sensibl dorothea wa as quick as he, andse her face chang, he ad, immedi, “but it is quit truethat the best mind have been sometim overstrain in work outtheir idea.”“you correct me,” said dorothea. “i express myself ill. i should havesaid that those who have great thought get too much worn in workingthem out. i us to feel about that, even when i wa a littl girl; andit alwai seem to me that the us i should like to make of my lifewould be to help some on who did great work, so that hi burthenmight be lighter.”dorothea wa led on to thi bit of autobiographi without ani sens ofmak a revel. but she had never befor said anyth to willwhich threw so strong a light on her marriag. he did not shrug hisshould; and for want of that muscular outlet he thought the moreirrit of beauti lip kiss holi skull and other emptinessesecclesiast enshrin. also he had to take care that hi speechshould not betrai that thought.“but you mai easili carri the help too far,” he said, “and getov-wrought yourself. ar you not too much shut up? you alreadi lookpal. it would be better for mr. casaubon to have a secretari; hecould easili get a man who would do half hi work for him. it wouldsav him more effectu, and you need onli help him in lighter wai.”“how can you think of that?” said dorothea, in a tone of earnestremonstr. “i should have no happi if i did not help him in hiswork. what could i do? there is no good to be done in lowick. the onlyth i desir is to help him more. and he object to a secretari:pleas not to mention that again.”“certainli not, now i know your feel. but i have heard both mr.brook and sir jame chettam express the same wish.”“ye,” said dorothea, “but thei don’t understand—thei want me to be agreat deal on horseback, and have the garden alter and newconservatori, to fill up my dai. i thought you could understand thaton’s mind ha other want,” she ad, rather impati—“besid,mr. casaubon cannot bear to hear of a secretari.”“my mistak is excus,” said will. “in old dai i us to hear mr.casaubon speak as if he look forward to have a secretari. inde heheld out the prospect of that offic to me. but i turn out to be—notgood enough for it.”dorothea wa try to extract out of thi an excus for her husband’sevid repuls, as she said, with a play smile, “you were not asteadi worker enough.”“no,” said will, shake hi head backward somewhat after the manner ofa spirit hors. and then, the old irrit demon prompt him togiv anoth good pinch at the moth-wing of poor mr. casaubon’s glori,he went on, “and i have seen sinc that mr. casaubon doe not like anyon to overlook hi work and know thoroughli what he is do. he istoo doubt—too uncertain of himself. i mai not be good for much, buth dislik me becaus i disagre with him.”will wa not without hi intent to be alwai gener, but ourtongu ar littl trigger which have usual been pull beforegener intent can be brought to bear. and it wa too intolerablethat casaubon’s dislik of him should not be fairli account for todorothea. yet when he had spoken he wa rather uneasi as to the effecton her.but dorothea wa strang quiet—not immedi indign, as she hadbeen on a like occas in rome. and the caus lai deep. she wa nolong struggl against the percept of fact, but adjustingherself to their clearest percept; and now when she look steadilyat her husband’s failur, still more at hi possibl conscious offailur, she seem to be look along the on track where duti becametend. will’s want of retic might have been met with moresever, if he had not alreadi been recommend to her merci by herhusband’s dislik, which must seem hard to her till she saw betterreason for it.she did not answer at onc, but after look down ruminatingli shesaid, with some earnest, “mr. casaubon must have overcom hisdislik of you so far as hi action were concern: and that isadmir.”“ye; he ha shown a sens of justic in famili matter. it wa anabomin thing that my grandmoth should have been disinheritedbecaus she made what thei call a _mesalli_, though there wasnoth to be said against her husband except that he wa a polishrefuge who gave lesson for hi bread.”“i wish i knew all about her!” said dorothea. “i wonder how she boreth chang from wealth to poverti: i wonder whether she wa happi withher husband! do you know much about them?”“no; onli that my grandfath wa a patriot—a bright fellow—could speakmani languag—music—got hi bread by teach all sort of thing.thei both di rather earli. and i never knew much of my father, beyondwhat my mother told me; but he inherit the music talent. irememb hi slow walk and hi long thin hand; and on dai remainswith me when he wa ly ill, and i wa veri hungri, and had onli alittl bit of bread.”“ah, what a differ life from mine!” said dorothea, with keeninterest, clasp her hand on her lap. “i have alwai had too much ofeveryth. but tell me how it wa—mr. casaubon could not have knownabout you then.”“no; but my father had made himself known to mr. casaubon, and that wasmi last hungri dai. my father di soon after, and my mother and i werewel taken care of. mr. casaubon alwai expressli recogn it as hisduti to take care of us becaus of the harsh injustic which had beenshown to hi mother’s sister. but now i am tell you what is not newto you.”in hi inmost soul will wa consciou of wish to tell dorothea whatwa rather new even in hi own construct of thing—name, that mr.casaubon had never done more than pai a debt toward him. will wa muchtoo good a fellow to be easi under the sens of be ungrat. andwhen gratitud ha becom a matter of reason there ar mani wai ofescap from it bond.“no,” answer dorothea; “mr. casaubon ha alwai avoid dwell onhi own honor action.” she did not feel that her husband’s conductwa depreci; but thi notion of what justic had requir in hisrel with will ladislaw took strong hold on her mind. after amoment’s paus, she ad, “he had never told me that he support yourmoth. is she still live?”“no; she di by an accid—a fall—four year ago. it is curiou thatmi mother, too, ran awai from her famili, but not for the sake of herhusband. she never would tell me anyth about her famili, except thatsh forsook them to get her own live—went on the stage, in fact. shewa a dark-ei creatur, with crisp ringlet, and never seem to beget old. you see i come of rebelli blood on both side,” willend, smile brightli at dorothea, while she wa still look withseri intent befor her, like a child see a drama for thefirst time.but her face, too, broke into a smile as she said, “that is yourapolog, i suppos, for have yourself been rather rebelli; i mean,to mr. casaubon’s wish. you must rememb that you have not done whath thought best for you. and if he dislik you—you were speak ofdislik a littl while ago—but i should rather sai, if he ha shown anypain feel toward you, you must consid how sensit he hasbecom from the wear effect of studi. perhap,” she continu,get into a plead tone, “my uncl ha not told you how seriousmr. casaubon’s ill wa. it would be veri petti of us who ar welland can bear thing, to think much of small offenc from those whocarri a weight of trial.”“you teach me better,” said will. “i will never grumbl on that subjectagain.” there wa a gentl in hi tone which came from theunutter content of perceiv—what dorothea wa hardlyconsci of—that she wa travel into the remot of pure pityand loyalti toward her husband. will wa readi to ador her piti andloyalti, if she would associ himself with her in manifest them.“i have realli sometim been a pervers fellow,” he went on, “but iwil never again, if i can help it, do or sai what you woulddisapprov.”“that is veri good of you,” said dorothea, with anoth open smile. “ishal have a littl kingdom then, where i shall give law. but you willsoon go awai, out of my rule, i imagin. you will soon be tire ofstai at the grang.”“that is a point i want to mention to you—on of the reason why iwish to speak to you alon. mr. brook propos that i should stai inthi neighborhood. he ha bought on of the middlemarch newspap, andh wish me to conduct that, and also to help him in other wai.”“would not that be a sacrific of higher prospect for you?” saiddorothea.“perhap; but i have alwai been blame for think of prospect, andnot settl to anyth. and here is someth offer to me. if youwould not like me to accept it, i will give it up. otherwis i wouldrath stai in thi part of the countri than go awai. i belong tonobodi anywher els.”“i should like you to stai veri much,” said dorothea, at onc, assimpli and readili as she had spoken at rome. there wa not the shadowof a reason in her mind at the moment why she should not sai so.“then i _will_ stai,” said ladislaw, shake hi head backward, risingand go toward the window, as if to see whether the rain had ceas.but the next moment, dorothea, accord to a habit which wa gettingcontinu stronger, began to reflect that her husband feltdiffer from herself, and she color deepli under the doubleembarrass of have express what might be in opposit to herhusband’s feel, and of have to suggest thi opposit to will.hi face wa not turn toward her, and thi made it easier to sai—“but my opinion is of littl consequ on such a subject. i think youshould be guid by mr. casaubon. i spoke without think of anythingels than my own feel, which ha noth to do with the realquest. but it now occur to me—perhap mr. casaubon might see thatth propos wa not wise. can you not wait now and mention it to him?”“i can’t wait to-dai,” said will, inwardli sear by the possibilitythat mr. casaubon would enter. “the rain is quit over now. i told mr.brook not to call for me: i would rather walk the five mile. i shallstrik across halsel common, and see the gleam on the wet grass. ilik that.”he approach her to shake hand quit hurriedli, long but notdar to sai, “don’t mention the subject to mr. casaubon.” no, hedar not, could not sai it. to ask her to be less simpl and directwould be like breath on the crystal that you want to see the lightthrough. and there wa alwai the other great dread—of himself becomingdim and forev rai-shorn in her ey.“i wish you could have stai,” said dorothea, with a touch ofmourn, as she rose and put out her hand. she also had herthought which she did not like to express:—will certainli ought to loseno time in consult mr. casaubon’s wish, but for her to urg thismight seem an undu dictat.so thei onli said “good-by,” and will quit the hous, strikingacross the field so as not to run ani risk of encount mr.casaubon’s carriag, which, howev, did not appear at the gate untilfour o’clock. that wa an unpropiti hour for come home: it wa tooearli to gain the moral support under ennui of dress hi person fordinn, and too late to undress hi mind of the dai’s frivolousceremoni and affair, so as to be prepar for a good plung into theseri busi of studi. on such occas he usual threw into aneasi-chair in the librari, and allow dorothea to read the londonpap to him, close hi ey the while. to-dai, howev, he declinedthat relief, observ that he had alreadi had too mani public detailsurg upon him; but he spoke more cheerfulli than usual, when dorotheaask about hi fatigu, and ad with that air of formal effort whichnev forsook him even when he spoke without hi waistcoat and cravat—“i have had the gratif of meet my former acquaint, dr.span, to-dai, and of be prais by on who is himself a worthyrecipi of prais. he spoke veri handsom of my late tractat onth egyptian mysteri,—us, in fact, term which it would not becomem to repeat.” in utter the last claus, mr. casaubon lean overth elbow of hi chair, and swai hi head up and down, appar asa muscular outlet instead of that recapitul which would not havebeen becom.“i am veri glad you have had that pleasur,” said dorothea, delightedto see her husband less weari than usual at thi hour. “befor you camei had been regret that you happen to be out to-dai.”“why so, my dear?” said mr. casaubon, throw himself backward again.“becaus mr. ladislaw ha been here; and he ha mention a propos ofmi uncl’s which i should like to know your opinion of.” her husbandsh felt wa realli concern in thi question. even with her ignoranceof the world she had a vagu impress that the posit offer towil wa out of keep with hi famili connect, and certainli mr.casaubon had a claim to be consult. he did not speak, but merelybow.“dear uncl, you know, ha mani project. it appear that he ha boughton of the middlemarch newspap, and he ha ask mr. ladislaw tostai in thi neighborhood and conduct the paper for him, besideshelp him in other wai.”dorothea look at her husband while she spoke, but he had at firstblink and final close hi ey, as if to save them; while hi lipsbecam more tens. “what is your opinion?” she ad, rather timidli,after a slight paus.“did mr. ladislaw come on purpos to ask my opinion?” said mr.casaubon, open hi ey narrowli with a knife-edg look atdorothea. she wa realli uncomfort on the point he inquir about,but she onli becam a littl more seriou, and her ey did not swerv.“no,” she answer immedi, “he did not sai that he came to askyour opinion. but when he mention the propos, he of cours expectedm to tell you of it.”mr. casaubon wa silent.“i fear that you might feel some object. but certainli a young manwith so much talent might be veri us to my uncl—might help him todo good in a better wai. and mr. ladislaw wish to have some fixedoccup. he ha been blame, he sai, for not seek someth ofthat kind, and he would like to stai in thi neighborhood becaus noon care for him elsewher.”dorothea felt that thi wa a consider to soften her husband.howev, he did not speak, and she present recur to dr. spanningand the archdeacon’s breakfast. but there wa no longer sunshin onthes subject.the next morn, without dorothea’s knowledg, mr. casaubon despatchedth follow letter, begin “dear mr. ladislaw” (he had alwaysbefor address him as “will”):—“mr. casaubon inform me that a propos ha been made to you, and(accord to an infer by no mean stretch) ha on your part beenin some degre entertain, which involv your resid in thisneighborhood in a capac which i am justifi in sai touch myown posit in such a wai as render it not onli natur andwarrant in me when that effect is view under the influenc oflegitim feel, but incumb on me when the same effect isconsid in the light of my respons, to state at onc thatyour accept of the propos abov indic would be highlyoffens to me. that i have some claim to the exercis of a veto here,would not, i believ, be deni by ani reason person cogniz ofth relat between us: relat which, though thrown into the pastbi your recent procedur, ar not therebi annul in their characterof determin anteced. i will not here make reflect on anyperson’s judgment. it is enough for me to point out to yourself thatther ar certain social fit and proprieti which should hindera somewhat near rel of mine from becom ani wise conspicu inthi vicin in a statu not onli much beneath my own, but associatedat best with the sciolism of literari or polit adventur. at anyr, the contrari issu must exclud you from further recept at myhous.your faithfulli,“edward casaubon.”meanwhil dorothea’s mind wa innoc at work toward the furtherembitter of her husband; dwell, with a sympathi that grew toagit, on what will had told her about hi parent andgrandpar. ani privat hour in her dai were usual spent in herblu-green boudoir, and she had come to be veri fond of it pallidquaint. noth had been outwardli alter there; but while thesumm had gradual advanc over the western field beyond the avenueof elm, the bare room had gather within it those memori of aninward life which fill the air as with a cloud of good or bad angel,the invis yet activ form of our spiritu triumph or ourspiritu fall. she had been so us to struggl for and to findresolv in look along the avenu toward the arch of western lightthat the vision itself had gain a commun power. even the palestag seem to have remind glanc and to mean mute, “ye, weknow.” and the group of delic touch miniatur had made anaudi as of be no longer disturb about their own earthli lot,but still humanli interest. especi the mysteri “aunt julia”about whom dorothea had never found it easi to question her husband.and now, sinc her convers with will, mani fresh imag hadgath round that aunt julia who wa will’s grandmoth; the presenceof that delic miniatur, so like a live face that she knew,help to concentr her feel. what a wrong, to cut off the girlfrom the famili protect and inherit onli becaus she had chosena man who wa poor! dorothea, earli troubl her elder with questionsabout the fact around her, had wrought herself into some independentclear as to the histor, polit reason why eldest son hadsuperior right, and why land should be entail: those reason,impress her with a certain aw, might be weightier than she knew,but here wa a question of ti which left them uninfring. here wa adaught whose child—even accord to the ordinari ap ofaristocrat institut by peopl who ar no more aristocrat thanretir grocer, and who have no more land to “keep togeth” than alawn and a paddock—would have a prior claim. wa inherit a questionof like or of respons? all the energi of dorothea’s naturew on the side of respons—the fulfil of claim found onour own deed, such as marriag and parentag.it wa true, she said to herself, that mr. casaubon had a debt to theladislaw—that he had to pai back what the ladislaw had been wrongedof. and now she began to think of her husband’s will, which had beenmad at the time of their marriag, leav the bulk of hi properti toher, with proviso in case of her have children. that ought to bealter; and no time ought to be lost. thi veri question which hadjust arisen about will ladislaw’s occup, wa the occas forplac thing on a new, right foot. her husband, she felt sure,accord to all hi previou conduct, would be readi to take the justview, if she propos it—she, in whose interest an unfair concentrationof the properti had been urg. hi sens of right had surmount andwould continu to surmount anyth that might be call antipathi. shesuspect that her uncl’s scheme wa disapprov by mr. casaubon, andthi made it seem all the more opportun that a fresh understandingshould be begun, so that instead of will’s start penniless andaccept the first function that offer itself, he should findhimself in possess of a right incom which should be paid by herhusband dure hi life, and, by an immedi alter of the will,should be secur at hi death. the vision of all thi as what ought tobe done seem to dorothea like a sudden let in of daylight, wakingh from her previou stupid and incuri self-absorb ignoranceabout her husband’s relat to other. will ladislaw had refus mr.casaubon’s futur aid on a ground that no longer appear right to her;and mr. casaubon had never himself seen fulli what wa the claim uponhim. “but he will!” said dorothea. “the great strength of hi characterli here. and what ar we do with our monei? we make no us of halfof our incom. my own monei bui me noth but an uneasi conscienc.”there wa a peculiar fascin for dorothea in thi divis ofproperti intend for herself, and alwai regard by her as excess.she wa blind, you see, to mani thing obviou to other—like totread in the wrong place, as celia had warn her; yet her blindnessto whatev did not lie in her own pure purpos carri her safe byth side of precipic where vision would have been peril with fear.the thought which had gather vivid in the solitud of herboudoir occupi her incessantli through the dai on which mr. casaubonhad sent hi letter to will. everyth seem hindranc to her tillsh could find an opportun of open her heart to her husband. tohi preoccupi mind all subject were to be approach gentli, and shehad never sinc hi ill lost from her conscious the dread ofagit him. but when young ardor is set brood over the conceptionof a prompt deed, the deed itself seem to start forth with independentlif, master ideal obstacl. the dai pass in a sombr fashion,not unusu, though mr. casaubon wa perhap unusu silent; butther were hour of the night which might be count on asopportun of convers; for dorothea, when awar of herhusband’s sleepless, had establish a habit of rise, light acandl, and read him to sleep again. and thi night she wa from thebegin sleepless, excit by resolv. he slept as usual for a fewhour, but she had risen softli and had sat in the dark for nearlyan hour befor he said—“dorothea, sinc you ar up, will you light a candl?”“do you feel ill, dear?” wa her first question, as she obei him.“no, not at all; but i shall be oblig, sinc you ar up, if you willread me a few page of lowth.”“mai i talk to you a littl instead?” said dorothea.“certainli.”“i have been think about monei all dai—that i have alwai had toomuch, and especi the prospect of too much.”“these, my dear dorothea, ar providenti arrang.”“but if on ha too much in consequ of other be wrong, itseem to me that the divin voic which tell us to set that wrongright must be obei.”“what, my love, is the bear of your remark?”“that you have been too liber in arrang for me—i mean, withregard to properti; and that make me unhappi.”“how so? i have none but compar distant connect.”“i have been led to think about your aunt julia, and how she wa leftin poverti onli becaus she marri a poor man, an act which wa notdisgrac, sinc he wa not unworthi. it wa on that ground, i know,that you educ mr. ladislaw and provid for hi mother.”dorothea wait a few moment for some answer that would help heronward. none came, and her next word seem the more forcibl to her,fall clear upon the dark silenc.“but sure we should regard hi claim as a much greater on, even toth half of that properti which i know that you have destin for me.and i think he ought at onc to be provid for on that understand.it is not right that he should be in the depend of poverti while wear rich. and if there is ani object to the propos he mention,the give him hi true place and hi true share would set asid anymot for hi accept it.”“mr. ladislaw ha probabl been speak to you on thi subject?” saidmr. casaubon, with a certain bite quick not habitu to him.“inde, no!” said dorothea, earnestli. “how can you imagin it, sinceh ha so late declin everyth from you? i fear you think toohardli of him, dear. he onli told me a littl about hi parent andgrandpar, and almost all in answer to my question. you ar sogood, so just—you have done everyth you thought to be right. but itseem to me clear that more than that is right; and i must speak aboutit, sinc i am the person who would get what is call benefit by that‘more’ not be done.”there wa a percept paus befor mr. casaubon repli, not quicklya befor, but with a still more bite emphasi.“dorothea, my love, thi is not the first occas, but it were wellthat it should be the last, on which you have assum a judgment onsubject beyond your scope. into the question how far conduct,especi in the matter of allianc, constitut a forfeitur offamili claim, i do not now enter. suffic it, that you ar not herequalifi to discrimin. what i now wish you to understand is, that iaccept no revis, still less dictat within that rang of affairswhich i have deliber upon as distinctli and properli mine. it isnot for you to interfer between me and mr. ladislaw, and still less toencourag commun from him to you which constitut a criticismon my procedur.”poor dorothea, shroud in the dark, wa in a tumult of conflictingemot. alarm at the possibl effect on himself of her husband’sstrongli manifest anger, would have check ani express of her ownresent, even if she had been quit free from doubt and compunctionund the conscious that there might be some justic in hi lastinsinu. hear him breath quickli after he had spoken, she satlisten, frighten, wretch—with a dumb inward cry for help to bearthi nightmar of a life in which everi energi wa arrest by dread.but noth els happen, except that thei both remain a long whilesleepless, without speak again.the next dai, mr. casaubon receiv the follow answer from willladislaw:—“dear mr. casaubon,—i have given all due consider to your letterof yesterdai, but i am unabl to take precis your view of our mutualposit. with the fullest acknowledg of your gener conduct tome in the past, i must still maintain that an oblig of thi kindcannot fairli fetter me as you appear to expect that it should. grantedthat a benefactor’s wish mai constitut a claim; there must alwai bea reserv as to the qualiti of those wish. thei mai possiblyclash with more imper consider. or a benefactor’s veto mightimpos such a negat on a man’s life that the consequ blank mightb more cruel than the benefact wa gener. i am mere usingstrong illustr. in the present case i am unabl to take your viewof the bear which my accept of occup—not enrichingcertainli, but not dishonor—will have on your own posit whichseem to me too substanti to be affect in that shadowi manner. andthough i do not believ that ani chang in our relat will occur(certainli none ha yet occur) which can nullifi the obligationsimpos on me by the past, pardon me for not see that thoseoblig should restrain me from us the ordinari freedom ofliv where i choos, and maintain myself by ani law occupationi mai choos. regret that there exist thi differ between usa to a relat in which the confer of benefit ha been entirelyon your side—i remain, your with persist oblig,will ladislaw.”poor mr. casaubon felt (and must not we, be imparti, feel with hima littl?) that no man had juster caus for disgust and suspicion thanh. young ladislaw, he wa sure, meant to defi and annoi him, meant towin dorothea’s confid and sow her mind with disrespect, and perhapsavers, toward her husband. some motiv beneath the surfac had beenneed to account for will’s sudden chang of cours in reject mr.casaubon’s aid and quit hi travel; and thi defiant determinationto fix himself in the neighborhood by take up someth so much atvari with hi former choic as mr. brook’s middlemarch project,reveal clearli enough that the undeclar motiv had relat todorothea. not for on moment did mr. casaubon suspect dorothea of anydoubl: he had no suspicion of her, but he had (what wa littleless uncomfort) the posit knowledg that her tendenc to formopinion about her husband’s conduct wa accompani with a dispositionto regard will ladislaw favor and be influenc by what he said.hi own proud retic had prevent him from ever be undeceiv inth supposit that dorothea had origin ask her uncl to invitewil to hi hous.and now, on receiv will’s letter, mr. casaubon had to consid hisduti. he would never have been easi to call hi action anyth elsethan duti; but in thi case, contend motiv thrust him back intoneg.should he appli directli to mr. brook, and demand of that troublesomegentleman to revok hi propos? or should he consult sir jameschettam, and get him to concur in remonstr against a step whichtouch the whole famili? in either case mr. casaubon wa awar thatfailur wa just as probabl as success. it wa imposs for him toment dorothea’s name in the matter, and without some alarmingurg mr. brook wa as like as not, after meet allrepresent with appar assent, to wind up by sai, “neverfear, casaubon! depend upon it, young ladislaw will do you credit.depend upon it, i have put my finger on the right thing.” and mr.casaubon shrank nervous from commun on the subject with sirjam chettam, between whom and himself there had never been anycordi, and who would immedi think of dorothea without anyment of her.poor mr. casaubon wa distrust of everybodi’s feel toward him,especi as a husband. to let ani on suppos that he wa jealouswould be to admit their (suspect) view of hi disadvantag: to letthem know that he did not find marriag particularli bliss wouldimpli hi convers to their (probabl) earlier disapprov. it wouldb as bad as let carp, and brasenos gener, know how backwardh wa in organ the matter for hi “kei to all mytholog.” allthrough hi life mr. casaubon had been try not to admit even tohimself the inward sore of self-doubt and jealousi. and on the mostdel of all person subject, the habit of proud suspiciousretic told doubli.thu mr. casaubon remain proudli, bitterli silent. but he hadforbidden will to come to lowick manor, and he wa mental preparingoth measur of frustrat.chapter xxxviii.“c’est beaucoup que le jugement de homm sur le action humain;tôt ou tard il devient efficac.”—guizot.sir jame chettam could not look with ani satisfact on mr. brook’snew cours; but it wa easier to object than to hinder. sir jamesaccount for hi have come in alon on dai to lunch with thecadwallad by sai—“i can’t talk to you as i want, befor celia: it might hurt her.inde, it would not be right.”“i know what you mean—the ‘pioneer’ at the grang!” dart in mr.cadwallad, almost befor the last word wa off her friend’s tongu.“it is fright—thi take to bui whistl and blow them ineverybodi’s hear. ly in bed all dai and plai at domino, likepoor lord plessi, would be more privat and bearabl.”“i see thei ar begin to attack our friend brook in the‘trumpet,’” said the rector, loung back and smile easili, as hewould have done if he had been attack himself. “there ar tremendoussarcasm against a landlord not a hundr mile from middlemarch, whorec hi own rent, and make no return.”“i do wish brook would leav that off,” said sir jame, with hislittl frown of annoy.“is he realli go to be put in nomin, though?” said mr.cadwallad. “i saw farebroth yesterdai—he’s whiggish himself, hoistsbrougham and us knowledg; that’s the worst i know of him;—and hesai that brook is get up a pretti strong parti. bulstrod, thebank, is hi foremost man. but he think brook would come off badlyat a nomin.”“exactli,” said sir jame, with earnest. “i have been inquiringinto the thing, for i’ve never known anyth about middlemarchpolit befor—the counti be my busi. what brook trust to, isthat thei ar go to turn out oliv becaus he is a peelit. buthawlei tell me that if thei send up a whig at all it is sure to bebagst, on of those candid who come from heaven know where, butdead against minist, and an experienc parliamentari man. hawlei’srather rough: he forgot that he wa speak to me. he said if brookew a pelt, he could get it cheaper than by go to thehust.”“i warn you all of it,” said mr. cadwallad, wave her handsoutward. “i said to humphrei long ago, mr. brook is go to make asplash in the mud. and now he ha done it.”“well, he might have taken it into hi head to marri,” said the rector.“that would have been a graver mess than a littl flirtat withpolit.”“he mai do that afterward,” said mr. cadwallad—“when he ha comeout on the other side of the mud with an agu.”“what i care for most is hi own digniti,” said sir jame. “of cours icar the more becaus of the famili. but he’s get on in life now,and i don’t like to think of hi expos himself. thei will be rakingup everyth against him.”“i suppos it’s no us try ani persuas,” said the rector.“there’s such an odd mixtur of obstinaci and changeabl in brook.have you tri him on the subject?”“well, no,” said sir jame; “i feel a delicaci in appear to dictat.but i have been talk to thi young ladislaw that brook is make afactotum of. ladislaw seem clever enough for anyth. i thought it aswel to hear what he had to sai; and he is against brook’s standingthi time. i think he’ll turn him round: i think the nomin mai bestav off.”“i know,” said mr. cadwallad, nod. “the independ memberhasn’t got hi speech well enough by heart.”“but thi ladislaw—there again is a vexati busi,” said sirjam. “we have had him two or three time to dine at the hall (youhav met him, by the bye) as brook’s guest and a relat ofcasaubon’s, think he wa onli on a fly visit. and now i find he’sin everybodi’s mouth in middlemarch as the editor of the ‘pioneer.’there ar stori go about him as a quill-drive alien, a foreignemissari, and what not.”“casaubon won’t like that,” said the rector.“there _is_ some foreign blood in ladislaw,” return sir jame. “ihop he won’t go into extrem opinion and carri brook on.”“oh, he’s a danger young sprig, that mr. ladislaw,” said mr.cadwallad, “with hi opera song and hi readi tongu. a sort ofbyron hero—an amor conspir, it strike me. and thoma aquinasi not fond of him. i could see that, the dai the pictur wa brought.”“i don’t like to begin on the subject with casaubon,” said sir jame.“he ha more right to interfer than i. but it’s a disagre affairal round. what a charact for anybodi with decent connect to showhimself in!—on of those newspap fellow! you have onli to look atkeck, who manag the ‘trumpet.’ i saw him the other dai with hawlei.hi write is sound enough, i believ, but he’s such a low fellow,that i wish he had been on the wrong side.”“what can you expect with these peddl middlemarch paper?” said therector. “i don’t suppos you could get a high style of man anywher tobe write up interest he doesn’t realli care about, and for pai thathardli keep him in at elbow.”“exactli: that make it so annoi that brook should have put a manwho ha a sort of connect with the famili in a posit of thatkind. for my part, i think ladislaw is rather a fool for accept.”“it is aquina’s fault,” said mr. cadwallad. “why didn’t he us hisinterest to get ladislaw made an _attach_ or sent to india? that ishow famili get rid of troublesom sprig.”“there is no know to what length the mischief mai go,” said sirjam, anxious. “but if casaubon sai noth, what can i do?”“oh my dear sir jame,” said the rector, “don’t let us make too much ofal thi. it is like enough to end in mere smoke. after a month ortwo brook and thi master ladislaw will get tire of each other;ladislaw will take wing; brook will sell the ‘pioneer,’ and everythingwil settl down again as usual.”“there is on good chanc—that he will not like to feel hi moneyooz awai,” said mr. cadwallad. “if i knew the item of electionexpens i could scare him. it’s no us ply him with wide word likeexpenditur: i wouldn’t talk of phlebotomi, i would empti a pot ofleech upon him. what we good stingi peopl don’t like, is have oursixp suck awai from us.”“and he will not like have thing rake up against him,” said sirjam. “there is the manag of hi estat. thei have begun uponthat alreadi. and it realli is pain for me to see. it is a nuisanceund on’s veri nose. i do think on is bound to do the best for on’sland and tenant, especi in these hard time.”“perhap the ‘trumpet’ mai rous him to make a chang, and some goodmai come of it all,” said the rector. “i know i should be glad. ishould hear less grumbl when my tith is paid. i don’t know what ishould do if there were not a modu in tipton.”“i want him to have a proper man to look after thing—i want him totak on garth again,” said sir jame. “he got rid of garth twelv yearsago, and everyth ha been go wrong sinc. i think of gettinggarth to manag for me—he ha made such a capit plan for mybuild; and lovegood is hardli up to the mark. but garth would notundertak the tipton estat again unless brook left it entir tohim.”“in the right of it too,” said the rector. “garth is an independentfellow: an origin, simpl-mind fellow. on dai, when he wa doingsom valuat for me, he told me point-blank that clergymen seldomunderstood anyth about busi, and did mischief when thei meddl;but he said it as quietli and respectfulli as if he had been talk tome about sailor. he would make a differ parish of tipton, if brookewould let him manag. i wish, by the help of the ‘trumpet,’ you couldbr that round.”“if dorothea had kept near her uncl, there would have been somech,” said sir jame. “she might have got some power over him intim, and she wa alwai uneasi about the estat. she had wonderfullygood notion about such thing. but now casaubon take her up entir.celia complain a good deal. we can hardli get her to dine with us,sinc he had that fit.” sir jame end with a look of piti disgust,and mr. cadwallad shrug her shoulder as much as to sai that_she_ wa not like to see anyth new in that direct.“poor casaubon!” the rector said. “that wa a nasti attack. i thoughth look shatter the other dai at the archdeacon’s.”“in point of fact,” resum sir jame, not choos to dwell on “fit,”“brook doesn’t mean badli by hi tenant or ani on els, but he hasgot that wai of pare and clip at expens.”“come, that’s a bless,” said mr. cadwallad. “that help him tofind himself in a morn. he mai not know hi own opinion, but hedo know hi own pocket.”“i don’t believ a man is in pocket by stingi on hi land,” saidsir jame.“oh, stingi mai be abus like other virtu: it will not do tokeep on’s own pig lean,” said mr. cadwallad, who had risen to lookout of the window. “but talk of an independ politician and he willappear.”“what! brook?” said her husband.“ye. now, you ply him with the ‘trumpet,’ humphrei; and i will put theleech on him. what will you do, sir jame?”“the fact is, i don’t like to begin about it with brook, in our mutualposit; the whole thing is so unpleas. i do wish peopl wouldbehav like gentlemen,” said the good baronet, feel that thi wa asimpl and comprehens programm for social well-be.“here you all ar, eh?” said mr. brook, shuffl round and shakinghand. “i wa go up to the hall by-and-by, chettam. but it’spleasant to find everybodi, you know. well, what do you think ofth?—go on a littl fast! it wa true enough, what lafittesaid—‘sinc yesterdai, a centuri ha pass awai:’—thei’re in the nextcenturi, you know, on the other side of the water. go on faster thanw ar.”“why, ye,” said the rector, take up the newspap. “here is the‘trumpet’ accus you of lag behind—did you see?”“eh? no,” said mr. brook, drop hi glove into hi hat and hastilyadjust hi ey-glass. but mr. cadwallad kept the paper in hishand, sai, with a smile in hi ey—“look here! all thi is about a landlord not a hundr mile frommiddlemarch, who receiv hi own rent. thei sai he is the mostretrogress man in the counti. i think you must have taught them thatword in the ‘pioneer.’”“oh, that is keck—an illiter fellow, you know. retrogress, now!come, that’s capit. he think it mean destruct: thei want to makem out a destruct, you know,” said mr. brook, with thatcheer which is usual sustain by an adversari’s ignor.“i think he know the mean of the word. here is a sharp stroke ortwo. _if we had to describ a man who is retrogress in the most evilsens of the word—we should sai, he is on who would dub himself areform of our constitut, while everi interest for which he isimmedi respons is go to decai: a philanthropist who cannotbear on rogu to be hang, but doe not mind five honest tenantsb half-starv: a man who shriek at corrupt, and keep hisfarm at rack-rent: who roar himself red at rotten borough, and doesnot mind if everi field on hi farm ha a rotten gate: a man veryopen-heart to leed and manchest, no doubt; he would give anynumb of repres who will pai for their seat out of their ownpocket: what he object to give, is a littl return on rent-dai tohelp a tenant to bui stock, or an outlai on repair to keep the weatherout at a tenant’s barn-door or make hi hous look a littl less likean irish cottier’s. but we all know the wag’s definit of aphilanthropist: a man whose chariti increas directli as the squar ofth distanc._ and so on. all the rest is to show what sort oflegisl a philanthropist is like to make,” end the rector,throw down the paper, and clasp hi hand at the back of hishead, while he look at mr. brook with an air of amus neutral.“come, that’s rather good, you know,” said mr. brook, take up thepap and try to bear the attack as easili as hi neighbor did, butcolor and smile rather nervous; “that about roar himself redat rotten borough—i never made a speech about rotten borough in mylif. and as to roar myself red and that kind of thing—these mennev understand what is good satir. satir, you know, should be trueup to a certain point. i recollect thei said that in ‘the edinburgh’somewher—it must be true up to a certain point.”“well, that is realli a hit about the gate,” said sir jame, anxiousto tread carefulli. “daglei complain to me the other dai that hehadn’t got a decent gate on hi farm. garth ha invent a new patternof gate—i wish you would try it. on ought to us some of on’s timberin that wai.”“you go in for fanci farm, you know, chettam,” said mr. brook,appear to glanc over the column of the “trumpet.” “that’s yourhobbi, and you don’t mind the expens.”“i thought the most expens hobbi in the world wa stand forparlia,” said mr. cadwallad. “thei said the last unsuccessfulcandid at middlemarch—gile, wasn’t hi name?—spent ten thousandpound and fail becaus he did not bribe enough. what a bitterreflect for a man!”“somebodi wa sai,” said the rector, laughingli, “that east retfordwa noth to middlemarch, for briberi.”“noth of the kind,” said mr. brook. “the tori bribe, you know:hawlei and hi set bribe with treat, hot codl, and that sort ofth; and thei bring the voter drunk to the poll. but thei ar notgo to have it their own wai in futur—not in futur, you know.middlemarch is a littl backward, i admit—the freemen ar a littlebackward. but we shall educ them—we shall bring them on, you know.the best peopl there ar on our side.”“hawlei sai you have men on your side who will do you harm,” remarkedsir jame. “he sai bulstrod the banker will do you harm.”“and that if you got pelt,” interpos mr. cadwallad, “half therotten egg would mean hatr of your committe-man. good heaven!think what it must be to be pelt for wrong opinion. and i seem torememb a stori of a man thei pretend to chair and let him fall intoa dust-heap on purpos!”“pelt is noth to their find hole in on’s coat,” said therector. “i confess that’s what i should be afraid of, if we parson hadto stand at the hust for prefer. i should be afraid of theirreckon up all my fish dai. upon my word, i think the truth isth hardest missil on can be pelt with.”“the fact is,” said sir jame, “if a man goe into public life he mustb prepar for the consequ. he must make himself proof againstcalumni.”“my dear chettam, that is all veri fine, you know,” said mr. brook.“but how will you make yourself proof against calumni? you should readhistori—look at ostrac, persecut, martyrdom, and that kind ofth. thei alwai happen to the best men, you know. but what is thatin horac?—_fiat justitia, ruat_ … someth or other.”“exactli,” said sir jame, with a littl more heat than usual. “what imean by be proof against calumni is be abl to point to the facta a contradict.”“and it is not martyrdom to pai bill that on ha run into on’sself,” said mr. cadwallad.but it wa sir jame’s evid annoy that most stir mr. brook.“well, you know, chettam,” he said, rise, take up hi hat andlean on hi stick, “you and i have a differ system. you ar allfor outlai with your farm. i don’t want to make out that my system isgood under all circumst—under all circumst, you know.”“there ought to be a new valuat made from time to time,” said sirjam. “return ar veri well occasion, but i like a fairvalu. what do you sai, cadwallad?”“i agre with you. if i were brook, i would choke the ‘trumpet’ atonc by get garth to make a new valuat of the farm, and givinghim _cart blanch_ about gate and repair: that’s my view of thepolit situat,” said the rector, broaden himself by stickinghi thumb in hi armhol, and laugh toward mr. brook.“that’s a showi sort of thing to do, you know,” said mr. brook. “but ishould like you to tell me of anoth landlord who ha distress histen for arrear as littl as i have. i let the old tenant stai on.i’m uncommonli easi, let me tell you, uncommonli easi. i have my ownidea, and i take my stand on them, you know. a man who doe that isalwai charg with eccentr, inconsist, and that kind ofth. when i chang my line of action, i shall follow my own idea.”after that, mr. brook rememb that there wa a packet which he hadomit to send off from the grang, and he bade everybodi hurriedlygood-by.“i didn’t want to take a liberti with brook,” said sir jame; “i seeh is nettl. but as to what he sai about old tenant, in point offact no new tenant would take the farm on the present term.”“i have a notion that he will be brought round in time,” said therector. “but you were pull on wai, elinor, and we were pullinganoth. you want to frighten him awai from expens, and we want tofrighten him into it. better let him try to be popular and see that hischaract as a landlord stand in hi wai. i don’t think it signifiestwo straw about the ‘pioneer,’ or ladislaw, or brook’s speechifyingto the middlemarch. but it doe signifi about the parishion intipton be comfort.”“excus me, it is you two who ar on the wrong tack,” said mr.cadwallad. “you should have prove to him that he lose monei by badmanag, and then we should all have pull togeth. if you put hima-horseback on polit, i warn you of the consequ. it wa allveri well to ride on stick at home and call them idea.”chapter xxxix.“if, as i have, you also doe, vertu attir in woman see,and dare love that, and sai so too, and forget the he and she;and if thi love, though place so, from prophan men you hide,which will no faith on thi bestow, or, if thei doe, derid:then you have done a braver thing than all the worthi did,and a braver thenc will spring, which is, to keep that hid.”—dr. donn.sir jame chettam’s mind wa not fruit in devic, but hi growinganxieti to “act on brook,” onc brought close to hi constant beliefin dorothea’s capac for influenc, becam form, and issu in alittl plan; name, to plead celia’s indisposit as a reason forfetch dorothea by herself to the hall, and to leav her at thegrang with the carriag on the wai, after make her fulli awar ofth situat concern the manag of the estat.in thi wai it happen that on dai near four o’clock, when mr. brookeand ladislaw were seat in the librari, the door open and mr.casaubon wa announc.will, the moment befor, had been low in the depth of boredom, and,oblig to help mr. brook in arrang “document” about hangingsheep-stealer, wa exemplifi the power our mind have of ridingsever hors at onc by inwardli arrang measur toward get alodg for himself in middlemarch and cut short hi constantresid at the grang; while there flit through all these steadierimag a tickl vision of a sheep-steal epic written with homericparticular. when mr. casaubon wa announc he start up as froman electr shock, and felt a tingl at hi finger-end. ani oneobserv him would have seen a chang in hi complexion, in theadjust of hi facial muscl, in the vivid of hi glanc, whichmight have made them imagin that everi molecul in hi bodi had passedth messag of a magic touch. and so it had. for effect magic istranscend natur; and who shall measur the subtleti of thosetouch which convei the qualiti of soul as well as bodi, and make aman’s passion for on woman differ from hi passion for anoth as joyin the morn light over vallei and river and white mountain-topdiff from joi among chines lantern and glass panel? will, too,wa made of veri impress stuff. the bow of a violin drawn near himcleverli, would at on stroke chang the aspect of the world for him,and hi point of view shift as easili as hi mood. dorothea’sentranc wa the fresh of morn.“well, my dear, thi is pleasant, now,” said mr. brook, meet andkiss her. “you have left casaubon with hi book, i suppos. that’sright. we must not have you get too learn for a woman, you know.”“there is no fear of that, uncl,” said dorothea, turn to will andshak hand with open cheer, while she made no other form ofgreet, but went on answer her uncl. “i am veri slow. when i wantto be busi with book, i am often plai truant among my thought. ifind it is not so easi to be learn as to plan cottag.”she seat herself besid her uncl opposit to will, and wa evidentlypreoccupi with someth that made her almost unmind of him. hewa ridicul disappoint, as if he had imagin that her cominghad anyth to do with him.“why, ye, my dear, it wa quit your hobbi to draw plan. but it wasgood to break that off a littl. hobbi ar apt to run awai with us,you know; it doesn’t do to be run awai with. we must keep the rein. ihav never let myself be run awai with; i alwai pull up. that iswhat i tell ladislaw. he and i ar alik, you know: he like to go intoeveryth. we ar work at capit punish. we shall do a greatdeal togeth, ladislaw and i.”“ye,” said dorothea, with characterist direct, “sir jame hasbeen tell me that he is in hope of see a great chang made soonin your manag of the estat—that you ar think of have thefarm valu, and repair made, and the cottag improv, so thattipton mai look quit anoth place. oh, how happi!”—she went on,clasp her hand, with a return to that more childlik impetuousmann, which had been subdu sinc her marriag. “if i were at homestil, i should take to ride again, that i might go about with youand see all that! and you ar go to engag mr. garth, who prais mycottag, sir jame sai.”“chettam is a littl hasti, my dear,” said mr. brook, coloringslightli; “a littl hasti, you know. i never said i should do anythingof the kind. i never said i should _not_ do it, you know.”“he onli feel confid that you will do it,” said dorothea, in avoic as clear and unhesit as that of a young chorist chant acredo, “becaus you mean to enter parliament as a member who care forth improv of the peopl, and on of the first thing to be madebett is the state of the land and the labor. think of kit down,uncl, who live with hi wife and seven children in a hous with onesit room and on bedroom hardli larger than thi tabl!—and thosepoor daglei, in their tumbl-down farmhous, where thei live in theback kitchen and leav the other room to the rat! that is on reasonwhi i did not like the pictur here, dear uncl—which you think mestupid about. i us to come from the villag with all that dirt andcoars ugli like a pain within me, and the simper pictur inth draw-room seem to me like a wick attempt to find delight inwhat is fals, while we don’t mind how hard the truth is for theneighbor outsid our wall. i think we have no right to come forwardand urg wider chang for good, until we have tri to alter the evilswhich lie under our own hand.”dorothea had gather emot as she went on, and had forgotteneveryth except the relief of pour forth her feel, uncheck:an experi onc habitu with her, but hardli ever present sinc hermarriag, which had been a perpetu struggl of energi with fear. forth moment, will’s admir wa accompani with a chill sens ofremot. a man is seldom asham of feel that he cannot love awoman so well when he see a certain great in her: natur havingintend great for men. but natur ha sometim made sadoversight in carri out her intent; as in the case of good mr.brook, whose masculin conscious wa at thi moment in rather astamm condit under the eloqu of hi niec. he could notimmedi find ani other mode of express himself than that ofris, fix hi ey-glass, and finger the paper befor him. atlast he said—“there is someth in what you sai, my dear, someth in what yousai—but not everyth—eh, ladislaw? you and i don’t like our picturesand statu be found fault with. young ladi ar a littl ardent,you know—a littl on-side, my dear. fine art, poetri, that kind ofth, elev a nation—_emollit more_—you understand a littl latinnow. but—eh? what?”these interrog were address to the footman who had come in tosai that the keeper had found on of daglei’s boi with a leveret inhi hand just kill.“i’ll come, i’ll come. i shall let him off easili, you know,” said mr.brook asid to dorothea, shuffl awai veri cheerfulli.“i hope you feel how right thi chang is that i—that sir jame wishesfor,” said dorothea to will, as soon as her uncl wa gone.“i do, now i have heard you speak about it. i shall not forget what youhav said. but can you think of someth els at thi moment? i maynot have anoth opportun of speak to you about what hasoccur,” said will, rise with a movement of impati, and holdingth back of hi chair with both hand.“prai tell me what it is,” said dorothea, anxious, also rise andgo to the open window, where monk wa look in, pant andwag hi tail. she lean her back against the window-frame, andlaid her hand on the dog’s head; for though, as we know, she wa notfond of pet that must be held in the hand or trodden on, she wasalwai attent to the feel of dog, and veri polit if she had todeclin their advanc.will follow her onli with hi ey and said, “i presum you know thatmr. casaubon ha forbidden me to go to hi hous.”“no, i did not,” said dorothea, after a moment’s paus. she wasevid much move. “i am veri, veri sorri,” she ad, mournfulli.she wa think of what will had no knowledg of—the conversationbetween her and her husband in the dark; and she wa anew smittenwith hopeless that she could influenc mr. casaubon’s action. butth mark express of her sorrow convinc will that it wa not allgiven to him person, and that dorothea had not been visit by theidea that mr. casaubon’s dislik and jealousi of him turn uponherself. he felt an odd mixtur of delight and vexat: of delightthat he could dwell and be cherish in her thought as in a pure home,without suspicion and without stint—of vexat becaus he wa of toolittl account with her, wa not formid enough, wa treat with anunhesit benevol which did not flatter him. but hi dread ofani chang in dorothea wa stronger than hi discont, and he beganto speak again in a tone of mere explan.“mr. casaubon’s reason is, hi displeasur at my take a posit herewhich he consid unsuit to my rank as hi cousin. i have told himthat i cannot give wai on thi point. it is a littl too hard on me toexpect that my cours in life is to be hamper by prejudic which ithink ridicul. oblig mai be stretch till it is no better thana brand of slaveri stamp on us when we were too young to know itsmean. i would not have accept the posit if i had not meant tomak it us and honor. i am not bound to regard famili dignityin ani other light.”dorothea felt wretch. she thought her husband altogeth in thewrong, on more ground than will had mention.“it is better for us not to speak on the subject,” she said, with atremul not common in her voic, “sinc you and mr. casaubondisagre. you intend to remain?” she wa look out on the lawn, withmelancholi medit.“ye; but i shall hardli ever see you now,” said will, in a tone ofalmost boyish complaint.“no,” said dorothea, turn her ey full upon him, “hardli ever. buti shall hear of you. i shall know what you ar do for my uncl.”“i shall know hardli anyth about you,” said will. “no on will tellm anyth.”“oh, my life is veri simpl,” said dorothea, her lip curl with anexquisit smile, which irradi her melancholi. “i am alwai atlowick.”“that is a dread imprison,” said will, impetu.“no, don’t think that,” said dorothea. “i have no long.”he did not speak, but she repli to some chang in hi express. “imean, for myself. except that i should like not to have so much morethan my share without do anyth for other. but i have a belief ofmi own, and it comfort me.”“what is that?” said will, rather jealou of the belief.“that by desir what is perfectli good, even when we don’t quit knowwhat it is and cannot do what we would, we ar part of the divin poweragainst evil—widen the skirt of light and make the struggl withdark narrow.”“that is a beauti mystic—it is a—”“pleas not to call it by ani name,” said dorothea, put out herhand entreatingli. “you will sai it is persian, or someth elsegeograph. it is my life. i have found it out, and cannot part withit. i have alwai been find out my religion sinc i wa a littlegirl. i us to prai so much—now i hardli ever prai. i try not to havedesir mere for myself, becaus thei mai not be good for other, andi have too much alreadi. i onli told you, that you might know quitewel how my dai go at lowick.”“god bless you for tell me!” said will, ardent, and ratherwond at himself. thei were look at each other like two fondchildren who were talk confidenti of bird.“what is _your_ religion?” said dorothea. “i mean—not what you knowabout religion, but the belief that help you most?”“to love what is good and beauti when i see it,” said will. “but iam a rebel: i don’t feel bound, as you do, to submit to what i don’tlike.”“but if you like what is good, that come to the same thing,” saiddorothea, smile.“now you ar subtl,” said will.“ye; mr. casaubon often sai i am too subtl. i don’t feel as if iwer subtl,” said dorothea, playfulli. “but how long my uncl is! imust go and look for him. i must realli go on to the hall. celia isexpect me.”will offer to tell mr. brook, who present came and said that hewould step into the carriag and go with dorothea as far as daglei’s,to speak about the small delinqu who had been caught with theleveret. dorothea renew the subject of the estat as thei drovealong, but mr. brook, not be taken unawar, got the talk under hisown control.“chettam, now,” he repli; “he find fault with me, my dear; but ishould not preserv my game if it were not for chettam, and he can’tsai that that expens is for the sake of the tenant, you know. it’s alittl against my feel:—poach, now, if you come to look into it—ihav often thought of get up the subject. not long ago, flavel,the methodist preacher, wa brought up for knock down a hare thatcam across hi path when he and hi wife were walk out togeth. hewa pretti quick, and knock it on the neck.”“that wa veri brutal, i think,” said dorothea.“well, now, it seem rather black to me, i confess, in a methodistpreach, you know. and johnson said, ‘you mai judg what a hypo_crite_he is.’ and upon my word, i thought flavel look veri littl like‘the highest style of man’—as somebodi call the christian—young, thepoet young, i think—you know young? well, now, flavel in hi shabbyblack gaiter, plead that he thought the lord had sent him and hiswif a good dinner, and he had a right to knock it down, though not amighti hunter befor the lord, as nimrod wa—i assur you it wa rathercom: field would have made someth of it—or scott, now—scottmight have work it up. but realli, when i came to think of it, icouldn’t help like that the fellow should have a bit of hare to saygrac over. it’s all a matter of prejudic—prejudic with the law onit side, you know—about the stick and the gaiter, and so on. howev,it doesn’t do to reason about thing; and law is law. but i got johnsonto be quiet, and i hush the matter up. i doubt whether chettam wouldnot have been more sever, and yet he come down on me as if i were thehardest man in the counti. but here we ar at daglei’s.”mr. brook got down at a farmyard-gate, and dorothea drove on. it iswond how much uglier thing will look when we onli suspect that wear blame for them. even our own person in the glass ar apt tochang their aspect for us after we have heard some frank remark ontheir less admir point; and on the other hand it is astonishinghow pleasantli conscienc take our encroach on those who nevercomplain or have nobodi to complain for them. daglei’s homestead neverbefor look so dismal to mr. brook as it did todai, with hi mindthu sore about the fault-find of the “trumpet,” echo by sirjam.it is true that an observ, under that soften influenc of the fineart which make other peopl’s hardship picturesqu, might have beendelight with thi homestead call freeman’s end: the old hous haddorm-window in the dark red roof, two of the chimnei were chokedwith ivi, the larg porch wa block up with bundl of stick, andhalf the window were close with grai worm-eaten shutter about whichth jasmin-bough grew in wild luxuri; the moulder garden wallwith hollyhock peep over it wa a perfect studi of highli mingledsubdu color, and there wa an ag goat (kept doubtless oninterest superstiti ground) ly against the open back-kitchendoor. the mossi thatch of the cow-shed, the broken grai barn-door, thepaup labor in rag breech who had nearli finish unload awagon of corn into the barn readi for earli thrash; the scanti dairyof cow be tether for milk and leav on half of the shed inbrown empti; the veri pig and white duck seem to wander aboutth uneven neglect yard as if in low spirit from feed on a toomeagr qualiti of rins,—all these object under the quiet light ofa sky marbl with high cloud would have made a sort of pictur whichw have all paus over as a “charm bit,” touch othersens than those which ar stir by the depress of theagricultur interest, with the sad lack of farm capit, as seenconstantli in the newspap of that time. but these troublesomeassoci were just now strongli present to mr. brook, and spoiledth scene for him. mr. daglei himself made a figur in the landscap,carri a pitchfork and wear hi milk-hat—a veri old beaverflatten in front. hi coat and breech were the best he had, and hewould not have been wear them on thi weekdai occas if he had notbeen to market and return later than usual, have given himself therar treat of dine at the public tabl of the blue bull. how he cameto fall into thi extravag would perhap be matter of wonder tohimself on the morrow; but befor dinner someth in the state of thecountri, a slight paus in the harvest befor the far dip were cut,the stori about the new king and the numer handbil on the wall,had seem to warrant a littl reckless. it wa a maxim aboutmiddlemarch, and regard as self-evid, that good meat should havegood drink, which last daglei interpret as plenti of tabl al wellfollow up by rum-and-water. these liquor have so far truth in themthat thei were not fals enough to make poor daglei seem merri: theyonli made hi discont less tongu-ti than usual. he had also takentoo much in the shape of muddi polit talk, a stimul dangerouslydisturb to hi farm conservat, which consist in hold thatwhatev is, is bad, and ani chang is like to be wors. he wasflush, and hi ey had a decidedli quarrelsom stare as he stoodstil grasp hi pitchfork, while the landlord approach with hiseasi shuffl walk, on hand in hi trouser-pocket and the otherswing round a thin walk-stick.“daglei, my good fellow,” began mr. brook, consciou that he wa goingto be veri friendli about the boi.“oh, ay, i’m a good feller, am i? thank ye, sir, thank ye,” saiddaglei, with a loud snarl ironi which made fag the sheep-dog stirfrom hi seat and prick hi ear; but see monk enter the yard aftersom outsid loiter, fag seat himself again in an attitud ofobserv. “i’m glad to hear i’m a good feller.”mr. brook reflect that it wa market-dai, and that hi worthi tenanthad probabl been dine, but saw no reason why he should not go on,sinc he could take the precaut of repeat what he had to sai tomr. daglei.“your littl lad jacob ha been caught kill a leveret, daglei: ihav told johnson to lock him up in the empti stabl an hour or two,just to frighten him, you know. but he will be brought home by-and-by,befor night: and you’ll just look after him, will you, and give him areprimand, you know?”“no, i woon’t: i’ll be dee’d if i’ll leather my boi to pleas you oranybodi els, not if you wa twenti landlord istid o’ on, and that abad un.”daglei’s word were loud enough to summon hi wife to the back-kitchendoor—the onli entranc ever us, and on alwai open except in badweath—and mr. brook, sai soothingli, “well, well, i’ll speak toyour wife—i didn’t mean beat, you know,” turn to walk to thehous. but daglei, onli the more inclin to “have hi sai” with agentleman who walk awai from him, follow at onc, with fagslouch at hi heel and sullenli evad some small and probablycharit advanc on the part of monk.“how do you do, mr. daglei?” said mr. brook, make some hast. “icam to tell you about your boi: i don’t want you to give him thestick, you know.” he wa care to speak quit plainli thi time.overwork mr. daglei—a thin, worn woman, from whose life pleasur hadso entir vanish that she had not even ani sundai cloth whichcould give her satisfact in prepar for church—had alreadi had amisunderstand with her husband sinc he had come home, and wa inlow spirit, expect the worst. but her husband wa beforehand inansw.“no, nor he woon’t hev the stick, whether you want it or no,” pursueddaglei, throw out hi voic, as if he want it to hit hard. “you’vegot no call to come an’ talk about stick o’ these primis, as youwoon’t give a stick tow’rt mend. go to middlemarch to ax for _your_charrickt.”“you’d far better hold your tongu, daglei,” said the wife, “and notkick your own trough over. when a man as is father of a famili ha beenan’ spent monei at market and made himself the wors for liquor, he’sdone enough mischief for on dai. but i should like to know what myboi’s done, sir.”“niver do you mind what he’s done,” said daglei, more fierc, “it’smy busi to speak, an’ not yourn. an’ i wull speak, too. i’ll hev mysai—supper or no. an’ what i sai is, as i’ve live upo’ your groundfrom my father and grandfath afor me, an’ hev drop our moneyinto’t, an’ me an’ my children might lie an’ rot on the ground fortop-dressin’ as we can’t find the monei to bui, if the king wasn’t toput a stop.”“my good fellow, you’re drunk, you know,” said mr. brook,confidenti but not judici. “anoth dai, anoth dai,” head, turn as if to go.but daglei immedi front him, and fag at hi heel growl low,as hi master’s voic grew louder and more insult, while monk alsodrew close in silent dignifi watch. the labor on the wagon werepaus to listen, and it seem wiser to be quit passiv than toattempt a ridicul flight pursu by a bawl man.“i’m no more drunk nor you ar, nor so much,” said daglei. “i can carrymi liquor, an’ i know what i meean. an’ i meean as the king ’ull put astop to ’t, for them sai it as know it, as there’s to be a rinform,and them landlord as never done the right thing by their tenant ’ullb treat i’ that wai as thei’ll hev to scuttl off. an’ there’s themi’ middlemarch know what the rinform is—an’ as know who’ll hev toscuttl. sai thei, ‘i know who _your_ landlord is.’ an’ sai i, ‘ihop you’re the better for knowin’ him, i arn’t.’ sai thei, ‘he’s aclos-fist un.’ ‘ay ay,’ sai i. ‘he’s a man for the rinform,’ saysthei. that’s what thei sai. an’ i made out what the rinform were—an’it were to send you an’ your like a-scuttlin’ an’ wi’ prettystrong-smellin’ thing too. an’ you mai do as you like now, for i’mnone afeard on you. an’ you’d better let my boi aloan, an’ look toyoursen, afor the rinform ha got upo’ your back. that’s what i’n gotto sai,” conclud mr. daglei, strike hi fork into the ground with afirm which prove inconveni as he tri to draw it up again.at thi last action monk began to bark loudli, and it wa a moment formr. brook to escap. he walk out of the yard as quickli as he could,in some amaz at the novelti of hi situat. he had never beeninsult on hi own land befor, and had been inclin to regardhimself as a gener favorit (we ar all apt to do so, when we thinkof our own amiabl more than of what other peopl ar like to wantof us). when he had quarrel with caleb garth twelv year befor hehad thought that the tenant would be pleas at the landlord’s takingeveryth into hi own hand.some who follow the narr of hi experi mai wonder at themidnight dark of mr. daglei; but noth wa easier in those timesthan for an hereditari farmer of hi grade to be ignor, in spitesomehow of have a rector in the twin parish who wa a gentleman toth backbon, a curat nearer at hand who preach more learnedli thanth rector, a landlord who had gone into everyth, especi fineart and social improv, and all the light of middlemarch onlythre mile off. as to the facil with which mortal escapeknowledg, try an averag acquaint in the intellectu blaze oflondon, and consid what that elig person for a dinner-parti wouldhav been if he had learn scant skill in “sum” from theparish-clerk of tipton, and read a chapter in the bibl with immensedifficulti, becaus such name as isaiah or apollo remainedunmanag after twice spell. poor daglei read a few versessometim on a sundai even, and the world wa at least not darker tohim than it had been befor. some thing he knew thoroughli, name,the slovenli habit of farm, and the awkward of weather, stockand crop, at freeman’s end—so call appar by wai of sarcasm, toimpli that a man wa free to quit it if he chose, but that there wa noearthli “beyond” open to him.chapter xl.wise in hi daili work wa he: to fruit of dilig,and not to faith or politi, he pli hi utmost sens.these perfect in their littl part, whose work is all their prize—without them how could law, or art, or tower citi rise?in watch effect, if onli of an electr batteri, it is oftennecessari to chang our place and examin a particular mixtur or groupat some distanc from the point where the movement we ar interest inwa set up. the group i am move toward is at caleb garth’sbreakfast-tabl in the larg parlor where the map and desk were:father, mother, and five of the children. mari wa just now at homewait for a situat, while christi, the boi next to her, wasget cheap learn and cheap fare in scotland, have to hisfath’s disappoint taken to book instead of that sacr call“busi.”the letter had come—nine costli letter, for which the postman hadbeen paid three and twopenc, and mr. garth wa forget hi tea andtoast while he read hi letter and laid them open on abov the other,sometim swai hi head slowli, sometim screw up hi mouth ininward debat, but not forget to cut off a larg red seal unbroken,which letti snatch up like an eager terrier.the talk among the rest went on unrestrainedli, for noth disturbedcaleb’s absorpt except shake the tabl when he wa write.two letter of the nine had been for mari. after read them, she hadpass them to her mother, and sat plai with her tea-spoon absent,till with a sudden recollect she return to her sew, which shehad kept on her lap dure breakfast.“oh, don’t sew, mari!” said ben, pull her arm down. “make me apeacock with thi bread-crumb.” he had been knead a small mass forth purpos.“no, no, mischief!” said mari, good-humoredli, while she prick hishand lightli with her needl. “try and mould it yourself: you have seenm do it often enough. i must get thi sew done. it is for rosamondvinci: she is to be marri next week, and she can’t be marri withoutthi handkerchief.” mari end merrili, amus with the last notion.“why can’t she, mari?” said letti, serious interest in thismysteri, and push her head so close to her sister that mari nowturn the threaten needl toward letti’s nose.“becaus thi is on of a dozen, and without it there would onli beeleven,” said mari, with a grave air of explan, so that letti sankback with a sens of knowledg.“have you made up your mind, my dear?” said mr. garth, lai thelett down.“i shall go to the school at york,” said mari. “i am less unfit toteach in a school than in a famili. i like to teach class best. and,you see, i must teach: there is noth els to be done.”“teach seem to me the most delight work in the world,” said mr.garth, with a touch of rebuk in her tone. “i could understand yourobject to it if you had not knowledg enough, mari, or if youdislik children.”“i suppos we never quit understand why anoth dislik what we like,mother,” said mari, rather curtli. “i am not fond of a schoolroom: ilik the outsid world better. it is a veri inconveni fault ofmin.”“it must be veri stupid to be alwai in a girl’ school,” said alfr.“such a set of nincompoop, like mr. ballard’s pupil walk two andtwo.”“and thei have no game worth plai at,” said jim. “thei can neitherthrow nor leap. i don’t wonder at mari’s not like it.”“what is that mari doesn’t like, eh?” said the father, look over hisspectacl and paus befor he open hi next letter.“be among a lot of nincompoop girl,” said alfr.“is it the situat you had heard of, mari?” said caleb, gentli,look at hi daughter.“ye, father: the school at york. i have determin to take it. it isquit the best. thirti-five pound a-year, and extra pai for teachingth smallest strummer at the piano.”“poor child! i wish she could stai at home with us, susan,” said caleb,look plaintiv at hi wife.“mari would not be happi without do her duti,” said mr. garth,magisteri, consciou of have done her own.“it wouldn’t make me happi to do such a nasti duti as that,” saidalfr—at which mari and her father laugh silent, but mr. garthsaid, grave—“do find a fitter word than nasti, my dear alfr, for everyth thatyou think disagre. and suppos that mari could help you to go tomr. hanmer’s with the monei she get?”“that seem to me a great shame. but she’s an old brick,” said alfr,rise from hi chair, and pull mari’s head backward to kiss her.mari color and laugh, but could not conceal that the tear werecom. caleb, look on over hi spectacl, with the angl of hiseyebrow fall, had an express of mingl delight and sorrow as hereturn to the open of hi letter; and even mr. garth, her lipscurl with a calm content, allow that inappropri languag topass without correct, although ben immedi took it up, and sang,“she’s an old brick, old brick, old brick!” to a canter measur,which he beat out with hi fist on mari’s arm.but mr. garth’s ey were now drawn toward her husband, who wasalreadi deep in the letter he wa read. hi face had an expressionof grave surpris, which alarm her a littl, but he did not like tobe question while he wa read, and she remain anxious watchingtil she saw him suddenli shaken by a littl joyou laugh as he turnedback to the begin of the letter, and look at her abov hisspectacl, said, in a low tone, “what do you think, susan?”she went and stood behind him, put her hand on hi shoulder, whilethei read the letter togeth. it wa from sir jame chettam, offeringto mr. garth the manag of the famili estat at freshitt andelsewher, and ad that sir jame had been request by mr. brookeof tipton to ascertain whether mr. garth would be dispos at the sametim to resum the agenc of the tipton properti. the baronet ad inveri oblig word that he himself wa particularli desir of seeingth freshitt and tipton estat under the same manag, and he hopedto be abl to show that the doubl agenc might be held on termsagre to mr. garth, whom he would be glad to see at the hall attwelv o’clock on the follow dai.“he write handsom, doesn’t he, susan?” said caleb, turn hi eyesupward to hi wife, who rais her hand from hi shoulder to hi ear,while she rest her chin on hi head. “brook didn’t like to ask mehimself, i can see,” he continu, laugh silent.“here is an honor to your father, children,” said mr. garth, lookinground at the five pair of ey, all fix on the parent. “he is askedto take a post again by those who dismiss him long ago. that showsthat he did hi work well, so that thei feel the want of him.”“like cincinnatu—hoorai!” said ben, ride on hi chair, with apleas confid that disciplin wa relax.“will thei come to fetch him, mother?” said letti, think of themayor and corpor in their robe.mr. garth pat letti’s head and smile, but see that her husbandwa gather up hi letter and like soon to be out of reach in thatsanctuari “busi,” she press hi shoulder and said emphat—“now, mind you ask fair pai, caleb.”“oh ye,” said caleb, in a deep voic of assent, as if it would beunreason to suppos anyth els of him. “it’ll come to betweenfour and five hundr, the two togeth.” then with a littl start ofremembr he said, “mari, write and give up that school. stai andhelp your mother. i’m as pleas as punch, now i’ve thought of that.”no manner could have been less like that of punch triumphant thancaleb’s, but hi talent did not lie in find phrase, though he wasveri particular about hi letter-write, and regard hi wife as atreasuri of correct languag.there wa almost an uproar among the children now, and mari held up thecambr embroideri toward her mother entreatingli, that it might beput out of reach while the boi drag her into a danc. mr. garth,in placid joi, began to put the cup and plate togeth, while calebpush hi chair from the tabl, as if he were go to move to thedesk, still sat hold hi letter in hi hand and look on theground medit, stretch out the finger of hi left hand,accord to a mute languag of hi own. at last he said—“it’s a thousand piti christi didn’t take to busi, susan. i shallwant help by-and-by. and alfr must go off to the engin—i’vemad up my mind to that.” he fell into medit and finger-rhetoricagain for a littl while, and then continu: “i shall make brook havenew agreement with the tenant, and i shall draw up a rotat ofcrop. and i’ll lai a wager we can get fine brick out of the clai atbott’s corner. i must look into that: it would cheapen the repair.it’s a fine bit of work, susan! a man without a famili would be glad todo it for noth.”“mind you don’t, though,” said hi wife, lift up her finger.“no, no; but it’s a fine thing to come to a man when he’s seen into thenatur of busi: to have the chanc of get a bit of the countryinto good fettl, as thei sai, and put men into the right wai withtheir farm, and get a bit of good contriv and solid buildingdon—that those who ar live and those who come after will be thebett for. i’d sooner have it than a fortun. i hold it the mosthonor work that is.” here caleb laid down hi letter, thrust hisfing between the button of hi waistcoat, and sat upright, butpres proceed with some aw in hi voic and move hi headslowli asid—“it’s a great gift of god, susan.”“that it is, caleb,” said hi wife, with answer fervor. “and it willb a bless to your children to have had a father who did such work:a father whose good work remain though hi name mai be forgotten.” shecould not sai ani more to him then about the pai.in the even, when caleb, rather tire with hi dai’s work, wasseat in silenc with hi pocket-book open on hi knee, while mr.garth and mari were at their sew, and letti in a corner waswhisp a dialogu with her doll, mr. farebroth came up theorchard walk, divid the bright august light and shadow with thetuft grass and the appl-tree bough. we know that he wa fond of hisparishion the garth, and had thought mari worth mention tolydg. he us to the full the clergyman’s privileg of disregardingth middlemarch discrimin of rank, and alwai told hi motherthat mr. garth wa more of a ladi than ani matron in the town. still,you see, he spent hi even at the vinci’, where the matron, thoughless of a ladi, presid over a well-lit draw-room and whist. inthos dai human intercours wa not determin sole by respect. butth vicar did heartili respect the garth, and a visit from him wa nosurpris to that famili. nevertheless he account for it even while hewa shake hand, by sai, “i come as an envoi, mr. garth: i havesometh to sai to you and garth on behalf of fred vinci. the fact is,poor fellow,” he continu, as he seat himself and look round withhi bright glanc at the three who were listen to him, “he ha takenm into hi confid.”mari’s heart beat rather quickli: she wonder how far fred’sconfid had gone.“we haven’t seen the lad for month,” said caleb. “i couldn’t thinkwhat wa becom of him.”“he ha been awai on a visit,” said the vicar, “becaus home wa alittl too hot for him, and lydgat told hi mother that the poorfellow must not begin to studi yet. but yesterdai he came and pouredhimself out to me. i am veri glad he did, becaus i have seen him growup from a youngster of fourteen, and i am so much at home in the housethat the children ar like nephew and niec to me. but it is adifficult case to advis upon. howev, he ha ask me to come andtel you that he is go awai, and that he is so miser about hisdebt to you, and hi inabl to pai, that he can’t bear to comehimself even to bid you good by.”“tell him it doesn’t signifi a farth,” said caleb, wave hi hand.“we’ve had the pinch and have got over it. and now i’m go to be asrich as a jew.”“which mean,” said mr. garth, smile at the vicar, “that we arego to have enough to bring up the boi well and to keep mari athom.”“what is the treasur-trove?” said mr. farebroth.“i’m go to be agent for two estat, freshitt and tipton; andperhap for a pretti littl bit of land in lowick besid: it’s all thesam famili connect, and employ spread like water if it’s onceset go. it make me veri happi, mr. farebroth”—here caleb threwback hi head a littl, and spread hi arm on the elbow of hischair—“that i’ve got an opportun again with the let of the land,and carri out a notion or two with improv. it’s a mostuncommonli cramp thing, as i’ve often told susan, to sit onhorseback and look over the hedg at the wrong thing, and not be ableto put your hand to it to make it right. what peopl do who go intopolit i can’t think: it drive me almost mad to see mismanagementov onli a few hundr acr.”it wa seldom that caleb volunt so long a speech, but hishappi had the effect of mountain air: hi ey were bright, and theword came without effort.“i congratul you heartili, garth,” said the vicar. “thi is the bestsort of new i could have had to carri to fred vinci, for he dwelt agood deal on the injuri he had done you in caus you to part withmonei—rob you of it, he said—which you want for other purpos. iwish fred were not such an idl dog; he ha some veri good point, andhi father is a littl hard upon him.”“where is he go?” said mr. garth, rather coldli.“he mean to try again for hi degre, and he is go up to studybefor term. i have advis him to do that. i don’t urg him to enterth church—on the contrari. but if he will go and work so as to pass,that will be some guarante that he ha energi and a will; and he isquit at sea; he doesn’t know what els to do. so far he will pleasehi father, and i have promis in the mean time to try and reconcilevinci to hi son’s adopt some other line of life. fred sai franklyh is not fit for a clergyman, and i would do anyth i could tohind a man from the fatal step of choos the wrong profess. hequot to me what you said, miss garth—do you rememb it?” (mr.farebroth us to sai “mari” instead of “miss garth,” but it wa partof hi delicaci to treat her with the more defer becaus, accordingto mr. vinci’s phrase, she work for her bread.)mari felt uncomfort, but, determin to take the matter lightli,answer at onc, “i have said so mani impertin thing to fred—wear such old playfellow.”“you said, accord to him, that he would be on of those ridiculousclergymen who help to make the whole clergi ridicul. realli, thatwa so cut that i felt a littl cut myself.”caleb laugh. “she get her tongu from you, susan,” he said, withsom enjoy.“not it flippanc, father,” said mari, quickli, fear that hermoth would be displeas. “it is rather too bad of fred to repeat myflipp speech to mr. farebroth.”“it wa certainli a hasti speech, my dear,” said mr. garth, with whomspeak evil of digniti wa a high misdemeanor. “we should not valueour vicar the less becaus there wa a ridicul curat in the nextparish.”“there’s someth in what she sai, though,” said caleb, not disposedto have mari’s sharp undervalu. “a bad workman of ani sort makeshi fellow mistrust. thing hang togeth,” he ad, look on thefloor and move hi feet uneasili with a sens that word werescanti than thought.“clearli,” said the vicar, amus. “by be contempt we set men’smind to the tune of contempt. i certainli agre with miss garth’s viewof the matter, whether i am condemn by it or not. but as to fredvinci, it is onli fair he should be excus a littl: oldfeatherston’s delus behavior did help to spoil him. there wassometh quit diabol in not leav him a farth after all. butfr ha the good tast not to dwell on that. and what he care mostabout is have offend you, mr. garth; he suppos you will neverthink well of him again.”“i have been disappoint in fred,” said mr. garth, with decis.“but i shall be readi to think well of him again when he give me goodreason to do so.”at thi point mari went out of the room, take letti with her.“oh, we must forgiv young peopl when thei’re sorri,” said caleb,watch mari close the door. “and as you sai, mr. farebroth, therewa the veri devil in that old man. now mari’s gone out, i must tellyou a thing—it’s onli known to susan and me, and you’ll not tell itagain. the old scoundrel want mari to burn on of the will the verynight he di, when she wa sit up with him by herself, and heoffer her a sum of monei that he had in the box by him if she woulddo it. but mari, you understand, could do no such thing—would not behandl hi iron chest, and so on. now, you see, the will he wantedburnt wa thi last, so that if mari had done what he want, fredvinci would have had ten thousand pound. the old man did turn to himat the last. that touch poor mari close; she couldn’t help it—she wasin the right to do what she did, but she feel, as she sai, much as ifsh had knock down somebodi’s properti and broken it against herwil, when she wa rightfulli defend herself. i feel with her,somehow, and if i could make ani amend to the poor lad, instead ofbear him a grudg for the harm he did us, i should be glad to do it.now, what is your opinion, sir? susan doesn’t agre with me; shesai—tell what you sai, susan.”“mari could not have act otherwis, even if she had known what wouldb the effect on fred,” said mr. garth, paus from her work, andlook at mr. farebroth.“and she wa quit ignor of it. it seem to me, a loss which fallson anoth becaus we have done right is not to lie upon ourconsci.”the vicar did not answer immedi, and caleb said, “it’s thefeel. the child feel in that wai, and i feel with her. you don’tmean your hors to tread on a dog when you’re back out of the wai;but it goe through you, when it’s done.”“i am sure mr. garth would agre with you there,” said mr.farebroth, who for some reason seem more inclin to rumin thanto speak. “on could hardli sai that the feel you mention about fredi wrong—or rather, mistaken—though no man ought to make a claim onsuch feel.”“well, well,” said caleb, “it’s a secret. you will not tell fred.”“certainli not. but i shall carri the other good new—that you canafford the loss he caus you.”mr. farebroth left the hous soon after, and see mari in theorchard with letti, went to sai good-by to her. thei made a prettypictur in the western light which brought out the bright of theappl on the old scant-leav bough—mari in her lavend gingham andblack ribbon hold a basket, while letti in her well-worn nankinpick up the fallen appl. if you want to know more particularli howmari look, ten to on you will see a face like her in the crowdedstreet to-morrow, if you ar there on the watch: she will not be amongthos daughter of zion who ar haughti, and walk with stretch-outneck and wanton ey, minc as thei go: let all those pass, and fixyour ey on some small plump brownish person of firm but quietcarriag, who look about her, but doe not suppos that anybodi islook at her. if she ha a broad face and squar brow, well-markedeyebrow and curli dark hair, a certain express of amus in herglanc which her mouth keep the secret of, and for the rest featuresentir insignific—take that ordinari but not disagre personfor a portrait of mari garth. if you made her smile, she would show youperfect littl teeth; if you made her angri, she would not rais hervoic, but would probabl sai on of the bitterest thing you have evertast the flavor of; if you did her a kind, she would never forgetit. mari admir the keen-face handsom littl vicar in hiswel-brush threadbar cloth more than ani man she had had theopportun of know. she had never heard him sai a foolish thing,though she knew that he did unwis on; and perhap foolish sayingswer more objection to her than ani of mr. farebroth’s unwisedo. at least, it wa remark that the actual imperfect ofth vicar’s cleric charact never seem to call forth the samescorn and dislik which she show beforehand for the predictedimperfect of the cleric charact sustain by fred vinci. theseirregular of judgment, i imagin, ar found even in riper mindsthan mari garth’s: our imparti is kept for abstract merit anddemerit, which none of us ever saw. will ani on guess toward which ofthos wide differ men mari had the peculiar woman’stender?—the on she wa most inclin to be sever on, or thecontrari?“have you ani messag for your old playfellow, miss garth?” said thevicar, as he took a fragrant appl from the basket which she heldtoward him, and put it in hi pocket. “someth to soften down thatharsh judgment? i am go straight to see him.”“no,” said mari, shake her head, and smile. “if i were to sai thath would not be ridicul as a clergyman, i must sai that he would besometh wors than ridicul. but i am veri glad to hear that he isgo awai to work.”“on the other hand, i am veri glad to hear that _you_ ar not goingawai to work. my mother, i am sure, will be all the happier if you willcom to see her at the vicarag: you know she is fond of have youngpeopl to talk to, and she ha a great deal to tell about old time.you will realli be do a kind.”“i should like it veri much, if i mai,” said mari. “everyth seemstoo happi for me all at onc. i thought it would alwai be part of mylif to long for home, and lose that grievanc make me feel ratherempti: i suppos it serv instead of sens to fill up my mind?”“mai i go with you, mari?” whisper letti—a most inconveni child,who listen to everyth. but she wa made exult by have herchin pinch and her cheek kiss by mr. farebroth—an incid whichsh narrat to her mother and father.as the vicar walk to lowick, ani on watch him close might haveseen him twice shrug hi shoulder. i think that the rare englishmenwho have thi gestur ar never of the heavi type—for fear of anylumb instanc to the contrari, i will sai, hardli ever; thei haveusu a fine tempera and much toler toward the smallererror of men (themselv inclus). the vicar wa hold an inwarddialogu in which he told himself that there wa probabl somethingmor between fred and mari garth than the regard of old playfellow,and repli with a question whether that bit of womanhood were not agreat deal too choic for that crude young gentleman. the rejoind tothi wa the first shrug. then he laugh at himself for be likelyto have felt jealou, as if he had been a man abl to marri, which,ad he, it is as clear as ani balanc-sheet that i am not. whereuponfollow the second shrug.what could two men, so differ from each other, see in thi “brownpatch,” as mari call herself? it wa certainli not her plain thatattract them (and let all plain young ladi be warn against thedanger encourag given them by societi to confid in their wantof beauti). a human be in thi ag nation of our is a verywond whole, the slow creation of long interchang influenc:and charm is a result of two such whole, the on love and the onelov.when mr. and mr. garth were sit alon, caleb said, “susan, guesswhat i’m think of.”“the rotat of crop,” said mr. garth, smile at him, abov herknit, “or els the back-door of the tipton cottag.”“no,” said caleb, grave; “i am think that i could do a great turnfor fred vinci. christi’s gone, alfr will be gone soon, and it willb five year befor jim is readi to take to busi. i shall wanthelp, and fred might come in and learn the natur of thing and actund me, and it might be the make of him into a us man, if hegiv up be a parson. what do you think?”“i think, there is hardli anyth honest that hi famili would objectto more,” said mr. garth, decidedli.“what care i about their object?” said caleb, with a sturdinesswhich he wa apt to show when he had an opinion. “the lad is of ag andmust get hi bread. he ha sens enough and quick enough; he likesb on the land, and it’s my belief that he could learn busi wellif he gave hi mind to it.”“but would he? hi father and mother want him to be a fine gentleman,and i think he ha the same sort of feel himself. thei all think usbeneath them. and if the propos came from you, i am sure mr. vincywould sai that we want fred for mari.”“life is a poor tale, if it is to be settl by nonsens of that sort,”said caleb, with disgust.“ye, but there is a certain pride which is proper, caleb.”“i call it improp pride to let fool’ notion hinder you from do agood action. there’s no sort of work,” said caleb, with fervor, puttingout hi hand and move it up and down to mark hi emphasi, “thatcould ever be done well, if you mind what fool sai. you must have itinsid you that your plan is right, and that plan you must follow.”“i will not oppos ani plan you have set your mind on, caleb,” saidmr. garth, who wa a firm woman, but knew that there were some pointson which her mild husband wa yet firmer. “still, it seem to be fixedthat fred is to go back to colleg: will it not be better to wait andse what he will choos to do after that? it is not easi to keep peopleagainst their will. and you ar not yet quit sure enough of your ownposit, or what you will want.”“well, it mai be better to wait a bit. but as to my get plenti ofwork for two, i’m pretti sure of that. i’ve alwai had my hand fullwith scatter thing, and there’s alwai someth fresh turn up.why, onli yesterdai—bless me, i don’t think i told you!—it wa ratherodd that two men should have been at me on differ side to do thesam bit of valu. and who do you think thei were?” said caleb,take a pinch of snuff and hold it up between hi finger, as if itwer a part of hi exposit. he wa fond of a pinch when it occurredto him, but he usual forgot that thi indulg wa at hi command.hi wife held down her knit and look attent.“why, that rigg, or rigg featherston, wa on. but bulstrod wasbefor him, so i’m go to do it for bulstrod. whether it’s mortgageor purchas thei’re go for, i can’t tell yet.”“can that man be go to sell the land just left him—which he hastaken the name for?” said mr. garth.“deuc know,” said caleb, who never refer the knowledg ofdiscredit do to ani higher power than the deuc. “but bulstrodeha long been want to get a handsom bit of land under hisfing—that i know. and it’s a difficult matter to get, in thi partof the countri.”caleb scatter hi snuff carefulli instead of take it, and thenad, “the in and out of thing ar curiou. here is the landthei’ve been all along expect for fred, which it seem the old mannev meant to leav him a foot of, but left it to thi side-slip of ason that he kept in the dark, and thought of hi stick there andvex everybodi as well as he could have vex ’em himself if he couldhav kept aliv. i sai, it would be curiou if it got into bulstrod’shand after all. the old man hate him, and never would bank with him.”“what reason could the miser creatur have for hate a man whom hehad noth to do with?” said mr. garth.“pooh! where’s the us of ask for such fellow’ reason? the soul ofman,” said caleb, with the deep tone and grave shake of the head whichalwai came when he us thi phrase—“the soul of man, when it getsfairli rotten, will bear you all sort of poison toad-stool, and noey can see whenc came the seed thereof.”it wa on of caleb’s quaint, that in hi difficulti of findingspeech for hi thought, he caught, as it were, snatch of dictionwhich he associ with variou point of view or state of mind; andwhenev he had a feel of aw, he wa haunt by a sens of biblicalphraseolog, though he could hardli have given a strict quotat.chapter xli.by swagger could i never thrive,for the rain it raineth everi dai.—_twelfth night_.the transact refer to by caleb garth as have gone forwardbetween mr. bulstrod and mr. joshua rigg featherston concern theland attach to stone court, had occas the interchang of alett or two between these personag.who shall tell what mai be the effect of write? if it happen to havebeen cut in stone, though it lie face down-most for ag on a forsakenbeach, or “rest quietli under the drum and trampl of manyconquest,” it mai end by let us into the secret of usurp andoth scandal gossip about long empir ago:—thi world beingappar a huge whisper-galleri. such condit ar oftenminut repres in our petti lifetim. as the stone which hasbeen kick by gener of clown mai come by curiou littl linksof effect under the ey of a scholar, through whose labor it mai atlast fix the date of invas and unlock religion, so a bit of inkand paper which ha long been an innoc wrap or stop-gap mai atlast be laid open under the on pair of ey which have knowledgeenough to turn it into the open of a catastroph. to uriel watchingth progress of planetari histori from the sun, the on result would bejust as much of a coincid as the other.have made thi rather lofti comparison i am less uneasi in callingattent to the exist of low peopl by whose interfer, howeverlittl we mai like it, the cours of the world is veri much determin.it would be well, certainli, if we could help to reduc their number,and someth might perhap be done by not lightli give occas totheir exist. social speak, joshua rigg would have beengener pronounc a superflu. but those who like peterfeatherston never had a copi of themselv demand, ar the veri lastto wait for such a request either in prose or vers. the copi in thiscas bore more of outsid resembl to the mother, in whose sexfrog-featur, accompani with fresh-color cheek and a well-roundedfigur, ar compat with much charm for a certain order of admir.the result is sometim a frog-face male, desir, sure, to noorder of intellig be. especi when he is suddenli broughtinto evid to frustrat other peopl’s expect—the veri lowestaspect in which a social superflu can present himself.but mr. rigg featherston’s low characterist were all of the sober,water-drink kind. from the earliest to the latest hour of the dai hewa alwai as sleek, neat, and cool as the frog he resembl, and oldpet had secretli chuckl over an offshoot almost more calcul,and far more imperturb, than himself. i will add that hisfing-nail were scrupul attend to, and that he meant to marrya well-educ young ladi (as yet unspecifi) whose person wa good,and whose connect, in a solid middl-class wai, were undeni.thu hi nail and modesti were compar to those of most gentlemen;though hi ambit had been educ onli by the opportun of aclerk and account in the smaller commerci hous of a seaport. hethought the rural featherston veri simpl absurd peopl, and thei intheir turn regard hi “bring up” in a seaport town as anexagger of the monstros that their brother peter, and stillmor peter’s properti, should have had such belong.the garden and gravel approach, as seen from the two window of thewainscot parlor at stone court, were never in better trim than now,when mr. rigg featherston stood, with hi hand behind him, lookingout on these ground as their master. but it seem doubt whether helook out for the sake of contempl or of turn hi back to aperson who stood in the middl of the room, with hi leg considerablyapart and hi hand in hi trouser-pocket: a person in all respect acontrast to the sleek and cool rigg. he wa a man obvious on the waytoward sixti, veri florid and hairi, with much grai in hi bushywhisk and thick curli hair, a stoutish bodi which show todisadvantag the somewhat worn join of hi cloth, and the air ofa swagger, who would aim at be notic even at a show offirework, regard hi own remark on ani other person’s performancea like to be more interest than the perform itself.hi name wa john raffl, and he sometim wrote jocos w.a.g. afterhi signatur, observ when he did so, that he wa onc taught byleonard lamb of finsburi who wrote b.a. after hi name, and that he,raffl, origin the wittic of call that celebr principalba-lamb. such were the appear and mental flavor of mr. raffl,both of which seem to have a stale odor of travel’ room in thecommerci hotel of that period.“come, now, josh,” he wa sai, in a full rumbl tone, “look at itin thi light: here is your poor mother go into the vale of year,and you could afford someth handsom now to make her comfort.”“not while you live. noth would make her comfort while youliv,” return rigg, in hi cool high voic. “what i give her, you’lltake.”“you bear me a grudg, josh, that i know. but come, now—as between manand man—without humbug—a littl capit might enabl me to make afirst-rate thing of the shop. the tobacco trade is grow. i shouldcut my own nose off in not do the best i could at it. i should stickto it like a flea to a fleec for my own sake. i should alwai be onth spot. and noth would make your poor mother so happi. i’ve prettywel done with my wild oat—turn fifti-five. i want to settl down inmi chimnei-corner. and if i onc buckl to the tobacco trade, i couldbr an amount of brain and experi to bear on it that would notb found elsewher in a hurri. i don’t want to be bother you onetim after anoth, but to get thing onc for all into the rightchannel. consid that, josh—as between man and man—and with your poormoth to be made easi for her life. i wa alwai fond of the oldwoman, by jove!”“have you done?” said mr. rigg, quietli, without look awai from thewindow.“ye, _i_’ve done,” said raffl, take hold of hi hat which stoodbefor him on the tabl, and give it a sort of orator push.“then just listen to me. the more you sai anyth, the less i shallbeliev it. the more you want me to do a thing, the more reason i shallhav for never do it. do you think i mean to forget your kick mewhen i wa a lad, and eat all the best victual awai from me and mymoth? do you think i forget your alwai come home to sell andpocket everyth, and go off again leav us in the lurch? ishould be glad to see you whip at the cart-tail. my mother wa afool to you: she’d no right to give me a father-in-law, and she’s beenpunish for it. she shall have her weekli allow paid and no more:and that shall be stop if you dare to come on to these premisesagain, or to come into thi countri after me again. the next time youshow yourself insid the gate here, you shall be driven off with thedog and the wagon’s whip.”as rigg pronounc the last word he turn round and look at raffleswith hi promin frozen ey. the contrast wa as strike as itcould have been eighteen year befor, when rigg wa a most unengagingkick boi, and raffl wa the rather thick-set adoni of bar-roomsand back-parlor. but the advantag now wa on the side of rigg, andauditor of thi convers might probabl have expect that raffleswould retir with the air of a defeat dog. not at all. he made agrimac which wa habitu with him whenev he wa “out” in a game;then subsid into a laugh, and drew a brandi-flask from hi pocket.“come, josh,” he said, in a cajol tone, “give us a spoon ofbrandi, and a sovereign to pai the wai back, and i’ll go. honor bright!i’ll go like a bullet, _by_ jove!”“mind,” said rigg, draw out a bunch of kei, “if i ever see youagain, i shan’t speak to you. i don’t own you ani more than if i saw acrow; and if you want to own me you’ll get noth by it but acharact for be what you ar—a spite, brassi, bulli rogu.”“that’s a piti, now, josh,” said raffl, affect to scratch hi headand wrinkl hi brow upward as if he were nonpluss. “i’m veri fondof you; _by_ jove, i am! there’s noth i like better than plaguingy—you’re so like your mother, and i must do without it. but thebrandi and the sovereign’s a bargain.”he jerk forward the flask and rigg went to a fine old oaken bureauwith hi kei. but raffl had remind himself by hi movement withth flask that it had becom danger loos from it leathercov, and catch sight of a fold paper which had fallen withinth fender, he took it up and shove it under the leather so as to maketh glass firm.by that time rigg came forward with a brandi-bottl, fill the flask,and hand raffl a sovereign, neither look at him nor speak tohim. after lock up the bureau again, he walk to the window andgaz out as impass as he had done at the begin of theinterview, while raffl took a small allow from the flask, screwedit up, and deposit it in hi side-pocket, with provok slow,make a grimac at hi stepson’s back.“farewel, josh—and if forev!” said raffl, turn back hi head ash open the door.rigg saw him leav the ground and enter the lane. the grai dai hadturn to a light drizzl rain, which freshen the hedgerow and thegrassi border of the by-road, and hasten the labor who wereload the last shock of corn. raffl, walk with the uneasi gaitof a town loiter oblig to do a bit of countri journei on foot,look as incongru amid thi moist rural quiet and industri as if hehad been a baboon escap from a menageri. but there were none tostar at him except the long-wean calv, and none to show dislik ofhi appear except the littl water-rat which rustl awai at hisapproach.he wa fortun enough when he got on to the highroad to be overtakenbi the stage-coach, which carri him to brass; and there he tookth new-made railwai, observ to hi fellow-passeng that heconsid it pretti well season now it had done for huskisson. mr.raffl on most occas kept up the sens of have been educ atan academi, and be abl, if he chose, to pass well everywher;inde, there wa not on of hi fellow-men whom he did not feelhimself in a posit to ridicul and torment, confid of theentertain which he thu gave to all the rest of the compani.he plai thi part now with as much spirit as if hi journei had beenentir success, resort at frequent interv to hi flask. thepap with which he had wedg it wa a letter sign _nicholasbulstrod_, but raffl wa not like to disturb it from it presentus posit.chapter xlii.how much, methink, i could despis thi manwer i not bound in chariti against it!—shakespear: _henri viii_.on of the profession call made by lydgat soon after hi returnfrom hi wed-journei wa to lowick manor, in consequ of alett which had request him to fix a time for hi visit.mr. casaubon had never put ani question concern the natur of hisil to lydgat, nor had he even to dorothea betrai ani anxieti asto how far it might be like to cut short hi labor or hi life. onthi point, as on all other, he shrank from piti; and if the suspicionof be piti for anyth in hi lot surmis or known in spite ofhimself wa embitt, the idea of call forth a show of compassionbi frankli admit an alarm or a sorrow wa necessarili intolerableto him. everi proud mind know someth of thi experi, andperhap it is onli to be overcom by a sens of fellowship deep enoughto make all effort at isol seem mean and petti instead ofexalt.but mr. casaubon wa now brood over someth through which thequest of hi health and life haunt hi silenc with a moreharass importun even than through the autumn unrip of hisauthorship. it is true that thi last might be call hi centralambit; but there ar some kind of authorship in which by far thelargest result is the uneasi suscept accumul in theconsci of the author—on know of the river by a few streaksamid a long-gather deposit of uncomfort mud. that wa the waywith mr. casaubon’s hard intellectu labor. their most characteristicresult wa not the “kei to all mytholog,” but a morbid consciousnessthat other did not give him the place which he had not demonstrablymerit—a perpetu suspici conjectur that the view entertain ofhim were not to hi advantag—a melancholi absenc of passion in hiseffort at achiev, and a passion resist to the confessionthat he had achiev noth.thu hi intellectu ambit which seem to other to have absorbedand dri him, wa realli no secur against wound, least of allagainst those which came from dorothea. and he had begun now to frameposs for the futur which were somehow more embitt to himthan anyth hi mind had dwelt on befor.against certain fact he wa helpless: against will ladislaw’sexist, hi defiant stai in the neighborhood of lowick, and hisflipp state of mind with regard to the possessor of authent,well-stamp erudit: against dorothea’s natur, alwai take onsom new shape of ardent activ, and even in submiss and silencecov fervid reason which it wa an irrit to think of: againstcertain notion and like which had taken possess of her mind inrel to subject that he could not possibl discuss with her. therewa no deni that dorothea wa as virtuou and love a young ladi ash could have obtain for a wife; but a young ladi turn out to besometh more troublesom than he had conceiv. she nurs him, sheread to him, she anticip hi want, and wa solicit about hisfeel; but there had enter into the husband’s mind the certaintythat she judg him, and that her wife devoted wa like apenitenti expiat of unbeliev thought—wa accompani with apow of comparison by which himself and hi do were seen toolumin as a part of thing in gener. hi discont passedvapor-like through all her gentl love manifest, and clung tothat inappreci world which she had onli brought nearer to him.poor mr. casaubon! thi suffer wa the harder to bear becaus itseem like a betray: the young creatur who had worship him withperfect trust had quickli turn into the critic wife; and earlyinst of critic and resent had made an impress which notend and submiss afterward could remov. to hi suspiciousinterpret dorothea’s silenc now wa a suppress rebellion; aremark from her which he had not in ani wai anticip wa anassert of consciou superior; her gentl answer had anirrit cautious in them; and when she acquiesc it wa aself-approv effort of forbear. the tenac with which he stroveto hide thi inward drama made it the more vivid for him; as we hearwith the more keen what we wish other not to hear.instead of wonder at thi result of miseri in mr. casaubon, i thinkit quit ordinari. will not a tini speck veri close to our vision blotout the glori of the world, and leav onli a margin by which we see theblot? i know no speck so troublesom as self. and who, if mr. casaubonhad chosen to expound hi discont—hi suspicion that he wa notani longer ador without critic—could have deni that thei werefound on good reason? on the contrari, there wa a strong reason tobe ad, which he had not himself taken explicitli intoaccount—name, that he wa not unmixedli ador. he suspect thi,howev, as he suspect other thing, without confess it, and liketh rest of us, felt how sooth it would have been to have acompanion who would never find it out.thi sore suscept in relat to dorothea wa thoroughlyprepar befor will ladislaw had return to lowick, and what hadoccur sinc then had brought mr. casaubon’s power of suspiciousconstruct into exasper activ. to all the fact which he knew,he ad imaginari fact both present and futur which becam more realto him than those becaus thei call up a stronger dislik, a morepredomin bitter. suspicion and jealousi of will ladislaw’sintent, suspicion and jealousi of dorothea’s impress, wereconstantli at their weav work. it would be quit unjust to him tosuppos that he could have enter into ani coars misinterpret ofdorothea: hi own habit of mind and conduct, quit as much as the openelev of her natur, save him from ani such mistak. what he wasjeal of wa her opinion, the swai that might be given to her ardentmind in it judgment, and the futur possibl to which thesemight lead her. as to will, though until hi last defiant letter he hadnoth definit which he would choos formal to alleg against him,he felt himself warrant in believ that he wa capabl of anydesign which could fascin a rebelli temper and an undisciplinedimpuls. he wa quit sure that dorothea wa the caus of will’sreturn from rome, and hi determin to settl in the neighborhood;and he wa penetr enough to imagin that dorothea had innocentlyencourag thi cours. it wa as clear as possibl that she wa readyto be attach to will and to be pliant to hi suggest: thei hadnev had a _tête-à-tête_ without her bring awai from it some newtroublesom impress, and the last interview that mr. casaubon wasawar of (dorothea, on return from freshitt hall, had for the firsttim been silent about have seen will) had led to a scene whichrous an angrier feel against them both than he had ever knownbefor. dorothea’s outpour of her notion about monei, in thedark of the night, had done noth but bring a mixtur of moreodi forebod into her husband’s mind.and there wa the shock late given to hi health alwai sadli presentwith him. he wa certainli much reviv; he had recov all hi usualpow of work: the ill might have been mere fatigu, and theremight still be twenti year of achiev befor him, which wouldjustifi the thirti year of prepar. that prospect wa made thesweet by a flavor of vengeanc against the hasti sneer of carp &compani; for even when mr. casaubon wa carri hi taper among thetomb of the past, those modern figur came athwart the dim light, andinterrupt hi dilig explor. to convinc carp of hi mistak,so that he would have to eat hi own word with a good deal ofindigest, would be an agreeabl accid of triumphant authorship,which the prospect of live to futur ag on earth and to alletern in heaven could not exclud from contempl. sinc, thu,the previs of hi own unend bliss could not nullifi the bittersavor of irrit jealousi and vindict, it is the lesssurpris that the probabl of a transient earthli bliss for otherperson, when he himself should have enter into glori, had not apot sweeten effect. if the truth should be that someundermin diseas wa at work within him, there might be largeopportun for some peopl to be the happier when he wa gone; and ifon of those peopl should be will ladislaw, mr. casaubon object sostrongli that it seem as if the annoy would make part of hisdisembodi exist.thi is a veri bare and therefor a veri incomplet wai of put thecas. the human soul move in mani channel, and mr. casaubon, we know,had a sens of rectitud and an honor pride in satisfi therequir of honor, which compel him to find other reason forhi conduct than those of jealousi and vindict. the wai in whichmr. casaubon put the case wa thi:—“in marri dorothea brook i hadto care for her well-be in case of my death. but well-be is notto be secur by ampl, independ possess of properti; on thecontrari, occas might aris in which such possess might exposeh to the more danger. she is readi prei to ani man who know how toplai adroitli either on her affection ardor or her quixoticenthusiasm; and a man stand by with that veri intent in hi mind—aman with no other principl than transient capric, and who ha aperson animos toward me—i am sure of it—an animos which is fedbi the conscious of hi ingratitud, and which he ha constantlyv in ridicul of which i am as well assur as if i had heard it.even if i live i shall not be without uneasi as to what he mayattempt through indirect influenc. thi man ha gain dorothea’s ear:he ha fascin her attent; he ha evid tri to impress hermind with the notion that he ha claim beyond anyth i have done forhim. if i die—and he is wait here on the watch for that—he willpersuad her to marri him. that would be calam for her and successfor him. _she_ would not think it calam: he would make her believeanyth; she ha a tendenc to immoder attach which sheinwardli reproach me for not respond to, and alreadi her mind isoccupi with hi fortun. he think of an easi conquest and ofent into my nest. that i will hinder! such a marriag would befat to dorothea. ha he ever persist in anyth except fromcontradict? in knowledg he ha alwai tri to be showi at smallcost. in religion he could be, as long as it suit him, the facileecho of dorothea’s vagari. when wa sciolism ever dissoci fromlax? i utterli distrust hi moral, and it is my duti to hinder toth utmost the fulfil of hi design.”the arrang made by mr. casaubon on hi marriag left strongmeasur open to him, but in rumin on them hi mind inevitablydwelt so much on the probabl of hi own life that the long toget the nearest possibl calcul had at last overcom hi proudretic, and had determin him to ask lydgat’s opinion as to thenatur of hi ill.he had mention to dorothea that lydgat wa come by appoint athalf-past three, and in answer to her anxiou question, whether he hadfelt ill, repli,—“no, i mere wish to have hi opinion concerningsom habitu symptom. you need not see him, my dear. i shall giveord that he mai be sent to me in the yew-tree walk, where i shall betak my usual exercis.”when lydgat enter the yew-tree walk he saw mr. casaubon slowlyreced with hi hand behind him accord to hi habit, and hi headbent forward. it wa a love afternoon; the leav from the loftylim were fall silent across the sombr evergreen, while thelight and shadow slept side by side: there wa no sound but thecaw of the rook, which to the accustom ear is a lullabi, or thatlast solemn lullabi, a dirg. lydgat, consciou of an energet framein it prime, felt some compass when the figur which he wa likelysoon to overtak turn round, and in advanc toward him show moremarkedli than ever the sign of prematur ag—the student’s bentshould, the emaci limb, and the melancholi line of the mouth.“poor fellow,” he thought, “some men with hi year ar like lion; onecan tell noth of their ag except that thei ar full grown.”“mr. lydgat,” said mr. casaubon, with hi invari polit air, “i amexceedingli oblig to you for your punctual. we will, if youpleas, carri on our convers in walk to and fro.”“i hope your wish to see me is not due to the return of unpleasantsymptom,” said lydgat, fill up a paus.“not immedi—no. in order to account for that wish i mustment—what it were otherwis needless to refer to—that my life, onal collater account insignific, deriv a possibl importancefrom the incomplet of labor which have extend through all itsbest year. in short, i have long had on hand a work which i would fainleav behind me in such a state, at least, that it might be committedto the press by—other. were i assur that thi is the utmost i canreason expect, that assur would be a us circumscript ofmi attempt, and a guid in both the posit and negativedetermin of my cours.”here mr. casaubon paus, remov on hand from hi back and thrust itbetween the button of hi singl-breast coat. to a mind largelyinstruct in the human destini hardli anyth could be moreinterest than the inward conflict impli in hi formal measuredaddress, deliv with the usual sing-song and motion of the head.nai, ar there mani situat more sublim tragic than the struggleof the soul with the demand to renounc a work which ha been all thesignific of it life—a signific which is to vanish as thewat which come and go where no man ha need of them? but there wasnoth to strike other as sublim about mr. casaubon, and lydgat,who had some contempt at hand for futil scholarship, felt a littleamus mingl with hi piti. he wa at present too ill acquaintedwith disast to enter into the patho of a lot where everyth isbelow the level of tragedi except the passion egoism of thesuffer.“you refer to the possibl hindranc from want of health?” he said,wish to help forward mr. casaubon’s purpos, which seem to beclog by some hesit.“i do. you have not impli to me that the symptom which—i am bound totestifi—you watch with scrupul care, were those of a fataldiseas. but were it so, mr. lydgat, i should desir to know the truthwithout reserv, and i appeal to you for an exact statement of yourconclus: i request it as a friendli servic. if you can tell methat my life is not threaten by anyth els than ordinarycasualti, i shall rejoic, on ground which i have alreadi indic.if not, knowledg of the truth is even more import to me.”“then i can no longer hesit as to my cours,” said lydgat; “but thefirst thing i must impress on you is that my conclus ar doublyuncertain—uncertain not onli becaus of my fallibl, but becausediseas of the heart ar emin difficult to found predict on.in ani case, on can hardli increas appreci the tremendousuncertainti of life.”mr. casaubon winc percept, but bow.“i believ that you ar suffer from what is call fattydegener of the heart, a diseas which wa first divin andexplor by laennec, the man who gave us the stethoscop, not so verymani year ago. a good deal of experi—a more lengthenedobserv—is want on the subject. but after what you have said, iti my duti to tell you that death from thi diseas is often sudden. atth same time, no such result can be predict. your condit mai beconsist with a toler comfort life for anoth fifteen year,or even more. i could add no inform to thi beyond anatom ormed detail, which would leav expect at precis the samepoint.” lydgat’s instinct wa fine enough to tell him that plainspeech, quit free from ostentati caution, would be felt by mr.casaubon as a tribut of respect.“i thank you, mr. lydgat,” said mr. casaubon, after a moment’s paus.“on thing more i have still to ask: did you commun what you havenow told me to mr. casaubon?”“partli—i mean, as to the possibl issu.” lydgat wa go toexplain why he had told dorothea, but mr. casaubon, with anunmistak desir to end the convers, wave hi hand slightli,and said again, “i thank you,” proceed to remark on the rare beautyof the dai.lydgat, certain that hi patient wish to be alon, soon left him;and the black figur with hand behind and head bent forward continuedto pace the walk where the dark yew-tree gave him a mute companionshipin melancholi, and the littl shadow of bird or leaf that fleetedacross the isl of sunlight, stole along in silenc as in the presenceof a sorrow. here wa a man who now for the first time found himselflook into the ey of death—who wa pass through on of thoserar moment of experi when we feel the truth of a commonplac,which is as differ from what we call know it, as the vision ofwat upon the earth is differ from the deliri vision of thewat which cannot be had to cool the burn tongu. when thecommonplac “we must all die” transform itself suddenli into the acuteconsci “i must die—and soon,” then death grappl us, and hisfing ar cruel; afterward, he mai come to fold us in hi arm asour mother did, and our last moment of dim earthli discern mai belik the first. to mr. casaubon now, it wa as if he suddenli foundhimself on the dark river-brink and heard the plash of the oncomingoar, not discern the form, but expect the summon. in such anhour the mind doe not chang it lifelong bia, but carri it onwardin imagin to the other side of death, gaze backward—perhap withth divin calm of benefic, perhap with the petti anxieti ofself-assert. what wa mr. casaubon’s bia hi act will give us aclew to. he held himself to be, with some privat scholarlyreserv, a believ christian, as to estim of the present andhop of the futur. but what we strive to gratifi, though we mai callit a distant hope, is an immedi desir: the futur estat for whichmen drudg up citi allei exist alreadi in their imagin and love.and mr. casaubon’s immedi desir wa not for divin communion andlight divest of earthli condit; hi passion long, poorman, clung low and mist-like in veri shadi place.dorothea had been awar when lydgat had ridden awai, and she hadstep into the garden, with the impuls to go at onc to her husband.but she hesit, fear to offend him by obtrud herself; for herardor, continu repuls, serv, with her intens memori, toheighten her dread, as thwart energi subsid into a shudder; and shewand slowli round the nearer clump of tree until she saw himadvanc. then she went toward him, and might have repres aheaven-sent angel come with a promis that the short hour remainingshould yet be fill with that faith love which cling the closer toa comprehend grief. hi glanc in repli to her wa so chill that shefelt her timid increas; yet she turn and pass her hand throughhi arm.mr. casaubon kept hi hand behind him and allow her pliant arm tocl with difficulti against hi rigid arm.there wa someth horribl to dorothea in the sensat which thisunrespons hard inflict on her. that is a strong word, but nottoo strong: it is in these act call trivial that the seed ofjoi ar forev wast, until men and women look round with haggardfac at the devast their own wast ha made, and sai, the earthbear no harvest of sweet—call their denial knowledg. you mayask why, in the name of manli, mr. casaubon should have behav inthat wai. consid that hi wa a mind which shrank from piti: have youever watch in such a mind the effect of a suspicion that what ispress it as a grief mai be realli a sourc of content, eitheractu or futur, to the be who alreadi offend by piti? besid,he knew littl of dorothea’s sensat, and had not reflect that onsuch an occas as the present thei were compar in strength to hisown sensibl about carp’s critic.dorothea did not withdraw her arm, but she could not ventur to speak.mr. casaubon did not sai, “i wish to be alon,” but he direct hisstep in silenc toward the hous, and as thei enter by the glassdoor on thi eastern side, dorothea withdrew her arm and linger onth mat, that she might leav her husband quit free. he enteredth librari and shut himself in, alon with hi sorrow.she went up to her boudoir. the open bow-window let in the seren gloryof the afternoon ly in the avenu, where the lime-tree cast longshadow. but dorothea knew noth of the scene. she threw herself on achair, not heed that she wa in the dazzl sun-rai: if there werediscomfort in that, how could she tell that it wa not part of herinward miseri?she wa in the reaction of a rebelli anger stronger than ani she hadfelt sinc her marriag. instead of tear there came word:—“what have i done—what am i—that he should treat me so? he never knowswhat is in my mind—he never care. what is the us of anyth i do? hewish he had never marri me.”she began to hear herself, and wa check into still. like on whoha lost hi wai and is weari, she sat and saw as in on glanc all thepath of her young hope which she should never find again. and just asclearli in the miser light she saw her own and her husband’ssolitud—how thei walk apart so that she wa oblig to survei him.if he had drawn her toward him, she would never have surveyedhim—never have said, “is he worth live for?” but would have felt himsimpli a part of her own life. now she said bitterli, “it is hi fault,not mine.” in the jar of her whole be, piti wa overthrown. wa ither fault that she had believ in him—had believ in hisworthi?—and what, exactli, wa he?— she wa abl enough to estimatehim—she who wait on hi glanc with trembl, and shut her bestsoul in prison, pai it onli hidden visit, that she might be pettyenough to pleas him. in such a crisi as thi, some women begin tohat.the sun wa low when dorothea wa think that she would not go downagain, but would send a messag to her husband sai that she wa notwel and prefer remain up-stair. she had never deliberatelyallow her resent to govern her in thi wai befor, but shebeliev now that she could not see him again without tell him thetruth about her feel, and she must wait till she could do it withoutinterrupt. he might wonder and be hurt at her messag. it wa goodthat he should wonder and be hurt. her anger said, as anger is apt tosai, that god wa with her—that all heaven, though it were crowd withspirit watch them, must be on her side. she had determin to ringher bell, when there came a rap at the door.mr. casaubon had sent to sai that he would have hi dinner in thelibrari. he wish to be quit alon thi even, be much occupi.“i shall not dine, then, tantripp.”“oh, madam, let me bring you a littl someth?”“no; i am not well. get everyth readi in my dress room, but praydo not disturb me again.”dorothea sat almost motionless in her medit struggl, while theeven slowli deepen into night. but the struggl changedcontinu, as that of a man who begin with a movement towardsstrik and end with conquer hi desir to strike. the energi thatwould anim a crime is not more than is want to inspir a resolvedsubmiss, when the nobl habit of the soul reassert itself. thatthought with which dorothea had gone out to meet her husband—herconvict that he had been ask about the possibl arrest of all hiswork, and that the answer must have wrung hi heart, could not be longwithout rise besid the imag of him, like a shadowi monitor lookingat her anger with sad remonstr. it cost her a litani of picturedsorrow and of silent cri that she might be the merci for thosesorrow—but the resolv submiss did come; and when the hous wasstil, and she knew that it wa near the time when mr. casaubonhabitu went to rest, she open her door gentli and stood outsidein the dark wait for hi come up-stair with a light in hishand. if he did not come soon she thought that she would go down andeven risk incur anoth pang. she would never again expect anythingels. but she did hear the librari door open, and slowli the lightadvanc up the staircas without nois from the footstep on thecarpet. when her husband stood opposit to her, she saw that hi facewa more haggard. he start slightli on see her, and she look upat him beseechingli, without speak.“dorothea!” he said, with a gentl surpris in hi tone. “were youwait for me?”“ye, i did not like to disturb you.”“come, my dear, come. you ar young, and need not to extend your lifebi watch.”when the kind quiet melancholi of that speech fell on dorothea’s ear,she felt someth like the thank that might well up in us if wehad narrowli escap hurt a lame creatur. she put her hand intoh husband’s, and thei went along the broad corridor togeth.book v.the dead hand.chapter xliii.“thi figur hath high price: ’t wa wrought with loveag ago in finest ivori;nought modish in it, pure and nobl linesof gener womanhood that fit all timethat too is costli ware; majolicaof deft design, to pleas a lordli ey:the smile, you see, is perfect—wonderfula mere faienc! a tabl ornamentto suit the richest mount.”dorothea seldom left home without her husband, but she did occasionallydr into middlemarch alon, on littl errand of shop or charitysuch as occur to everi ladi of ani wealth when she live within threemil of a town. two dai after that scene in the yew-tree walk, shedetermin to us such an opportun in order if possibl to seelydg, and learn from him whether her husband had realli felt anydepress chang of symptom which he wa conceal from her, andwheth he had insist on know the utmost about himself. she feltalmost guilti in ask for knowledg about him from anoth, but thedread of be without it—the dread of that ignor which would makeh unjust or hard—overcam everi scrupl. that there had been somecrisi in her husband’s mind she wa certain: he had the veri next daybegun a new method of arrang hi note, and had associ her quitenewli in carri out hi plan. poor dorothea need to lai up storesof patienc.it wa about four o’clock when she drove to lydgat’s hous in lowickg, wish, in her immedi doubt of find him at home, that shehad written beforehand. and he wa not at home.“is mr. lydgat at home?” said dorothea, who had never, that she knewof, seen rosamond, but now rememb the fact of the marriag. ye,mr. lydgat wa at home.“i will go in and speak to her, if she will allow me. will you ask herif she can see me—see mr. casaubon, for a few minut?”when the servant had gone to deliv that messag, dorothea could hearsound of music through an open window—a few note from a man’s voiceand then a piano burst into roulad. but the roulad broke offsuddenli, and then the servant came back sai that mr. lydgat wouldb happi to see mr. casaubon.when the draw-room door open and dorothea enter, there wa asort of contrast not infrequ in countri life when the habit of thediffer rank were less blent than now. let those who know, tell usexactli what stuff it wa that dorothea wore in those dai of mildautumn—that thin white woollen stuff soft to the touch and soft to theey. it alwai seem to have been late wash, and to smell of thesweet hedg—wa alwai in the shape of a peliss with sleev hangingal out of the fashion. yet if she had enter befor a still audiencea imogen or cato’s daughter, the dress might have seem rightenough: the grace and digniti were in her limb and neck; and about hersimpli part hair and candid ey the larg round poke which wa thenin the fate of women, seem no more odd as a head-dress than the goldtrench we call a halo. by the present audienc of two person, nodramat heroin could have been expect with more interest than mr.casaubon. to rosamond she wa on of those counti divin not mixingwith middlemarch mortal, whose slightest mark of manner orappear were worthi of her studi; moreov, rosamond wa not withoutsatisfact that mr. casaubon should have an opportun of studi_her_. what is the us of be exquisit if you ar not seen by thebest judg? and sinc rosamond had receiv the highest compliment atsir godwin lydgat’s, she felt quit confid of the impress shemust make on peopl of good birth. dorothea put out her hand with herusu simpl kind, and look admiringli at lydgat’s lovelybrid—awar that there wa a gentleman stand at a distanc, butse him mere as a coat figur at a wide angl. the gentleman wastoo much occupi with the presenc of the on woman to reflect on thecontrast between the two—a contrast that would certainli have beenstrik to a calm observ. thei were both tall, and their ey wereon a level; but imagin rosamond’s infantin blond and wondrouscrown of hair-plait, with her pale-blue dress of a fit and fashion soperfect that no dressmak could look at it without emot, a largeembroid collar which it wa to be hope all behold would knowth price of, her small hand duli set off with ring, and thatcontrol self-conscious of manner which is the expensivesubstitut for simplic.“thank you veri much for allow me to interrupt you,” said dorothea,immedi. “i am anxiou to see mr. lydgat, if possibl, befor i gohom, and i hope that you might possibl tell me where i could findhim, or even allow me to wait for him, if you expect him soon.”“he is at the new hospit,” said rosamond; “i am not sure how soon hewil come home. but i can send for him.”“will you let me go and fetch him?” said will ladislaw, come forward.he had alreadi taken up hi hat befor dorothea enter. she coloredwith surpris, but put out her hand with a smile of unmistakablepleasur, sai—“i did not know it wa you: i had no thought of see you here.”“mai i go to the hospit and tell mr. lydgat that you wish to seehim?” said will.“it would be quicker to send the carriag for him,” said dorothea, “ifyou will be kind enough to give the messag to the coachman.”will wa move to the door when dorothea, whose mind had flash in aninst over mani connect memori, turn quickli and said, “i willgo myself, thank you. i wish to lose no time befor get home again.i will drive to the hospit and see mr. lydgat there. prai excus me,mr. lydgat. i am veri much oblig to you.”her mind wa evid arrest by some sudden thought, and she leftth room hardli consciou of what wa immedi around her—hardlyconsci that will open the door for her and offer her hi arm tolead her to the carriag. she took the arm but said noth. will wasfeel rather vex and miser, and found noth to sai on hissid. he hand her into the carriag in silenc, thei said good-by,and dorothea drove awai.in the five minut’ drive to the hospit she had time for somereflect that were quit new to her. her decis to go, and herpreoccup in leav the room, had come from the sudden sens thatther would be a sort of decept in her voluntarili allow anyfurth intercours between herself and will which she wa unabl toment to her husband, and alreadi her errand in seek lydgat wa amatt of conceal. that wa all that had been explicitli in hermind; but she had been urg also by a vagu discomfort. now that shewa alon in her drive, she heard the note of the man’s voic and theaccompani piano, which she had not note much at the time, returningon her inward sens; and she found herself think with some wonderthat will ladislaw wa pass hi time with mr. lydgat in herhusband’s absenc. and then she could not help rememb that he hadpass some time with her under like circumst, so why should thereb ani unfit in the fact? but will wa mr. casaubon’s rel, andon toward whom she wa bound to show kind. still there had beensign which perhap she ought to have understood as impli that mr.casaubon did not like hi cousin’s visit dure hi own absenc.“perhap i have been mistaken in mani thing,” said poor dorothea toherself, while the tear came roll and she had to dry them quickli.she felt confusedli unhappi, and the imag of will which had been soclear to her befor wa mysteri spoil. but the carriag stoppedat the gate of the hospit. she wa soon walk round the grass plotswith lydgat, and her feel recov the strong bent which had madeh seek for thi interview.will ladislaw, meanwhil, wa mortifi, and knew the reason of itclearli enough. hi chanc of meet dorothea were rare; and here forth first time there had come a chanc which had set him at adisadvantag. it wa not onli, as it had been hitherto, that she wasnot suprem occupi with him, but that she had seen him undercircumst in which he might appear not to be suprem occupiedwith her. he felt thrust to a new distanc from her, amongst thecircl of middlemarch who made no part of her life. but that wasnot hi fault: of cours, sinc he had taken hi lodg in the town,he had been make as mani acquaint as he could, hi positionrequir that he should know everybodi and everyth. lydgat wasreal better worth know than ani on els in the neighborhood, andh happen to have a wife who wa music and altogeth worth callingupon. here wa the whole histori of the situat in which diana haddescend too unexpectedli on her worshipp. it wa mortifi. willwa consciou that he should not have been at middlemarch but fordorothea; and yet hi posit there wa threaten to divid him fromher with those barrier of habitu sentiment which ar more fatal toth persist of mutual interest than all the distanc between romeand britain. prejudic about rank and statu were easi enough to defyin the form of a tyrann letter from mr. casaubon; but prejudic,like odor bodi, have a doubl exist both solid andsubtl—solid as the pyramid, subtl as the twentieth echo of an echo,or as the memori of hyacinth which onc scent the dark. and willwa of a tempera to feel keenli the presenc of subtleti: a manof clumsier percept would not have felt, as he did, that for thefirst time some sens of unfit in perfect freedom with him hadsprung up in dorothea’s mind, and that their silenc, as he conductedh to the carriag, had had a chill in it. perhap casaubon, in hishatr and jealousi, had been insist to dorothea that will had slidbelow her social. confound casaubon!will re-enter the draw-room, took up hi hat, and lookingirrit as he advanc toward mr. lydgat, who had seat herselfat her work-tabl, said—“it is alwai fatal to have music or poetri interrupt. mai i comeanoth dai and just finish about the render of ‘lungi dal caroben’?”“i shall be happi to be taught,” said rosamond. “but i am sure youadmit that the interrupt wa a veri beauti on. i quit envi youracquaint with mr. casaubon. is she veri clever? she look as ifsh were.”“realli, i never thought about it,” said will, sulkili.“that is just the answer tertiu gave me, when i first ask him if shewer handsom. what is it that you gentlemen ar think of when youar with mr. casaubon?”“herself,” said will, not indispos to provok the charm mr.lydgat. “when on see a perfect woman, on never think of herattribut—on is consciou of her presenc.”“i shall be jealou when tertiu goe to lowick,” said rosamond,dimpl, and speak with aeri light. “he will come back andthink noth of me.”“that doe not seem to have been the effect on lydgat hitherto. mr.casaubon is too unlik other women for them to be compar with her.”“you ar a devout worshipp, i perceiv. you often see her, isuppos.”“no,” said will, almost pettishli. “worship is usual a matter oftheori rather than of practic. but i am practis it to excess justat thi moment—i must realli tear myself awai.”“prai come again some even: mr. lydgat will like to hear the music,and i cannot enjoi it so well without him.”when her husband wa at home again, rosamond said, stand in front ofhim and hold hi coat-collar with both her hand, “mr. ladislaw washer sing with me when mr. casaubon came in. he seem vex. doyou think he dislik her see him at our hous? sure your positioni more than equal to hi—whatev mai be hi relat to thecasaubon.”“no, no; it must be someth els if he were realli vex. ladislaw isa sort of gypsi; he think noth of leather and prunella.”“music apart, he is not alwai veri agreeabl. do you like him?”“ye: i think he is a good fellow: rather miscellan andbric-a-brac, but likabl.”“do you know, i think he ador mr. casaubon.”“poor devil!” said lydgat, smile and pinch hi wife’s ear.rosamond felt herself begin to know a great deal of the world,especi in discov what when she wa in her unmarri girlhoodhad been inconceiv to her except as a dim tragedi in by-gonecostum—that women, even after marriag, might make conquest andenslav men. at that time young ladi in the countri, even wheneduc at mr. lemon’s, read littl french literatur later thanracin, and public print had not cast their present magnificentillumin over the scandal of life. still, vaniti, with a woman’swhole mind and dai to work in, can construct abundantli on slighthint, especi on such a hint as the possibl of indefiniteconquest. how delight to make captiv from the throne of marriagewith a husband as crown-princ by your side—himself in fact asubject—while the captiv look up forev hopeless, lose their restprob, and if their appetit too, so much the better! but rosamond’sromanc turn at present chiefli on her crown-princ, and it wasenough to enjoi hi assur subject. when he said, “poor devil!” sheask, with play curios—“why so?”“why, what can a man do when he take to ador on of you mermaid?he onli neglect hi work and run up bill.”“i am sure you do not neglect your work. you ar alwai at thehospit, or see poor patient, or think about some doctor’squarrel; and then at home you alwai want to pore over your microscopeand phial. confess you like those thing better than me.”“haven’t you ambit enough to wish that your husband should besometh better than a middlemarch doctor?” said lydgat, let hishand fall on to hi wife’s shoulder, and look at her withaffection graviti. “i shall make you learn my favorit bit from anold poet—‘why should our pride make such a stir to beand be forgot? what good is like to thi,to do worthi the write, and to writeworthi the read and the world delight?’what i want, rosi, is to do worthi the write,—and to write out myselfwhat i have done. a man must work, to do that, my pet.”“of cours, i wish you to make discoveri: no on could more wish youto attain a high posit in some better place than middlemarch. youcannot sai that i have ever tri to hinder you from work. but wecannot live like hermit. you ar not discont with me, tertiu?”“no, dear, no. i am too entir content.”“but what did mr. casaubon want to sai to you?”“mere to ask about her husband’s health. but i think she is go tobe splendid to our new hospit: i think she will give us two hundreda-year.”chapter xliv.i would not creep along the coast but steerout in mid-sea, by guidanc of the star.when dorothea, walk round the laurel-plant plot of the newhospit with lydgat, had learn from him that there were no sign ofchang in mr. casaubon’s bodili condit beyond the mental sign ofanxieti to know the truth about hi ill, she wa silent for a fewmoment, wonder whether she had said or done anyth to rous thisnew anxieti. lydgat, not will to let slip an opportun offurth a favorit purpos, ventur to sai—“i don’t know whether your or mr. casaubon’s attent ha been drawnto the need of our new hospit. circumst have made it seemrath egotist in me to urg the subject; but that is not my fault:it is becaus there is a fight be made against it by the othermed men. i think you ar gener interest in such thing, for irememb that when i first had the pleasur of see you at tiptongrang befor your marriag, you were ask me some question aboutth wai in which the health of the poor wa affect by their miserableh.”“ye, inde,” said dorothea, brighten. “i shall be quit gratefulto you if you will tell me how i can help to make thing a littlebett. everyth of that sort ha slip awai from me sinc i havebeen marri. i mean,” she said, after a moment’s hesit, “that thepeopl in our villag ar toler comfort, and my mind ha beentoo much taken up for me to inquir further. but here—in such a placea middlemarch—there must be a great deal to be done.”“there is everyth to be done,” said lydgat, with abrupt energi.“and thi hospit is a capit piec of work, due entir to mr.bulstrod’s exert, and in a great degre to hi monei. but on mancan’t do everyth in a scheme of thi sort. of cours he lookedforward to help. and now there’s a mean, petti feud set up against theth in the town, by certain person who want to make it a failur.”“what can be their reason?” said dorothea, with naiv surpris.“chiefli mr. bulstrod’s unpopular, to begin with. half the townwould almost take troubl for the sake of thwart him. in thi stupidworld most peopl never consid that a thing is good to be done unlessit is done by their own set. i had no connect with bulstrod beforei came here. i look at him quit imparti, and i see that he hassom notion—that he ha set thing on foot—which i can turn to goodpubl purpos. if a fair number of the better educ men went towork with the belief that their observ might contribut to thereform of medic doctrin and practic, we should soon see a changefor the better. that’s my point of view. i hold that by refus towork with mr. bulstrod i should be turn my back on an opportunityof make my profess more gener servic.”“i quit agre with you,” said dorothea, at onc fascin by thesitu sketch in lydgat’s word. “but what is there against mr.bulstrod? i know that my uncl is friendli with him.”“peopl don’t like hi religi tone,” said lydgat, break offther.“that is all the stronger reason for despis such an opposit,”said dorothea, look at the affair of middlemarch by the light ofth great persecut.“to put the matter quit fairli, thei have other object to him:—hei master and rather unsoci, and he is concern with trade,which ha complaint of it own that i know noth about. but what hasthat to do with the question whether it would not be a fine thing toestablish here a more valuabl hospit than ani thei have in thecounti? the immedi motiv to the opposit, howev, is the factthat bulstrod ha put the medic direct into my hand. of cours iam glad of that. it give me an opportun of do some goodwork,—and i am awar that i have to justifi hi choic of me. but theconsequ is, that the whole profess in middlemarch have setthemselv tooth and nail against the hospit, and not onli refus tocooper themselv, but try to blacken the whole affair and hindersubscript.”“how veri petti!” exclaim dorothea, indignantli.“i suppos on must expect to fight on’s wai: there is hardli anythingto be done without it. and the ignor of peopl about here isstupend. i don’t lai claim to anyth els than have us someopportun which have not come within everybodi’s reach; but therei no stifl the offenc of be young, and a new-comer, andhappen to know someth more than the old inhabit. still, if ibeliev that i can set go a better method of treatment—if i believethat i can pursu certain observ and inquiri which mai be alast benefit to medic practic, i should be a base truckler if iallow ani consider of person comfort to hinder me. and thecours is all the clearer from there be no salari in question to putmi persist in an equivoc light.”“i am glad you have told me thi, mr. lydgat,” said dorothea,cordial. “i feel sure i can help a littl. i have some monei, anddon’t know what to do with it—that is often an uncomfort thought tome. i am sure i can spare two hundr a-year for a grand purpos likethi. how happi you must be, to know thing that you feel sure will dogreat good! i wish i could awak with that knowledg everi morn.there seem to be so much troubl taken that on can hardli see thegood of!”there wa a melancholi cadenc in dorothea’s voic as she spoke theselast word. but she present ad, more cheerfulli, “prai come tolowick and tell us more of thi. i will mention the subject to mr.casaubon. i must hasten home now.”she did mention it that even, and said that she should like tosubscrib two hundr a-year—she had seven hundr a-year as theequival of her own fortun, settl on her at her marriag. mr.casaubon made no object beyond a pass remark that the sum mightb disproportion in relat to other good object, but whendorothea in her ignor resist that suggest, he acquiesc. hedid not care himself about spend monei, and wa not reluct togiv it. if he ever felt keenli ani question of monei it wa throughth medium of anoth passion than the love of materi properti.dorothea told him that she had seen lydgat, and recit the gist ofher convers with him about the hospit. mr. casaubon did notquest her further, but he felt sure that she had wish to know whathad pass between lydgat and himself. “she know that i know,” saidth ever-restless voic within; but that increas of tacit knowledgeonli thrust further off ani confid between them. he distrust heraffect; and what loneli is more lone than distrust?chapter xlv.it is the humor of mani head to extol the dai of their forefath,and declaim against the wicked of time present. whichnotwithstand thei cannot handsom do, without the borrow helpand satir of time past; condemn the vice of their own time, byth express of vice in time which thei commend, which cannot butargu the commun of vice in both. horac, therefor, juven, andpersiu, were no prophet, although their line did seem to indigitateand point at our time.—sir thoma brown: _pseudodoxia epidemica_.that opposit to the new fever hospit which lydgat had sketch todorothea wa, like other opposit, to be view in mani differentlight. he regard it as a mixtur of jealousi and dunderheadedprejudic. mr. bulstrod saw in it not onli medic jealousi but adetermin to thwart himself, prompt mainli by a hatr of thatvit religion of which he had striven to be an effectu layrepres—a hatr which certainli found pretext apart fromreligion such as were onli too easi to find in the entangl ofhuman action. these might be call the ministeri view. butopposit have the illimit rang of object at command, whichne never stop short at the boundari of knowledg, but can drawforev on the vast of ignor. what the opposit in middlemarchsaid about the new hospit and it administr had certainli agreat deal of echo in it, for heaven ha taken care that everybodyshal not be an origin; but there were differ whichrepres everi social shade between the polish moder of dr.minchin and the trenchant assert of mr. dollop, the landladi of thetankard in slaughter lane.mr. dollop becam more and more convinc by her own assever,that dr. lydgat meant to let the peopl die in the hospit, if not topoison them, for the sake of cut them up without sai by yourleav or with your leav; for it wa a known “fac” that he had wantedto cut up mr. gobi, as respect a woman as ani in parlei street,who had monei in trust befor her marriag—a poor tale for a doctor,who if he wa good for anyth should know what wa the matter withyou befor you di, and not want to pry into your insid after youwer gone. if that wa not reason, mr. dollop wish to know what wa;but there wa a preval feel in her audienc that her opinion wasa bulwark, and that if it were overthrown there would be no limit toth cut-up of bodi, as had been well seen in burk and hare withtheir pitch-plaister—such a hang busi as that wa not want inmiddlemarch!and let it not be suppos that opinion at the tankard in slaughterlan wa unimport to the medic profess: that old authenticpubl-hous—the origin tankard, known by the name of dollop’s—wasth resort of a great benefit club, which had some month befor put toth vote whether it long-stand medic man, “doctor gambit,” shouldnot be cashier in favor of “thi doctor lydgat,” who wa capabl ofperform the most astonish cure, and rescu peopl altogethergiven up by other practition. but the balanc had been turnedagainst lydgat by two member, who for some privat reason held thatthi power of resuscit person as good as dead wa an equivocalrecommend, and might interfer with providenti favor. in thecours of the year, howev, there had been a chang in the publicsenti, of which the unanim at dollop’s wa an index.a good deal more than a year ago, befor anyth wa known oflydg’s skill, the judgment on it had natur been divid,depend on a sens of likelihood, situat perhap in the pit of thestomach or in the pineal gland, and differ in it verdict, but notth less valuabl as a guid in the total deficit of evid. patientswho had chronic diseas or whose live had long been worn threadbar,like old featherston’s, had been at onc inclin to try him; also,mani who did not like pai their doctor’s bill, thought agreeabl ofopen an account with a new doctor and send for him without stintif the children’s temper want a dose, occas when the oldpractition were often crusti; and all person thu inclin toemploi lydgat held it like that he wa clever. some consid thath might do more than other “where there wa liver;”—at least therewould be no harm in get a few bottl of “stuff” from him, sinc ifthes prove useless it would still be possibl to return to thepurifi pill, which kept you aliv if thei did not remov theyellow. but these were peopl of minor import. good middlemarchfamili were of cours not go to chang their doctor without reasonshown; and everybodi who had emploi mr. peacock did not feel obligedto accept a new man mere in the charact of hi successor, objectingthat he wa “not like to be equal to peacock.”but lydgat had not been long in the town befor there were particularsenough report of him to breed much more specif expect and tointensifi differ into partisanship; some of the particular beingof that impress order of which the signific is entir hidden,like a statist amount without a standard of comparison, but with anot of exclam at the end. the cubic feet of oxygen yearlyswallow by a full-grown man—what a shudder thei might have creat insom middlemarch circl! “oxygen! nobodi know what that mai be—is itani wonder the cholera ha got to dantzic? and yet there ar peopl whosai quarantin is no good!”on of the fact quickli rumor wa that lydgat did not dispensedrug. thi wa offens both to the physician whose exclusivedistinct seem infring on, and to the surgeon-apothecari withwhom he rang himself; and onli a littl while befor, thei might havecount on have the law on their side against a man who withoutcal himself a london-made m.d. dare to ask for pai except as acharg on drug. but lydgat had not been experienc enough to foreseethat hi new cours would be even more offens to the laiti; and tomr. mawmsei, an import grocer in the top market, who, though not oneof hi patient, question him in an affabl manner on the subject, hewa injudici enough to give a hasti popular explan of hisreason, point out to mr. mawmsei that it must lower the characterof practition, and be a constant injuri to the public, if their onlymod of get paid for their work wa by their make out long billsfor draught, bolus, and mixtur.“it is in that wai that hard-work medic men mai come to be almosta mischiev as quack,” said lydgat, rather thoughtlessli. “to gettheir own bread thei must overdos the king’s lieg; and that’s a badsort of treason, mr. mawmsei—undermin the constitut in a fatalwai.”mr. mawmsei wa not onli an overs (it wa about a question ofoutdoor pai that he wa have an interview with lydgat), he wa alsoasthmat and had an increas famili: thu, from a medic point ofview, as well as from hi own, he wa an import man; inde, anexcept grocer, whose hair wa arrang in a flame-like pyramid,and whose retail defer wa of the cordial, encouragingkind—jocos complimentari, and with a certain consider abstinencefrom let out the full forc of hi mind. it wa mr. mawmsei’sfriendli jocos in question him which had set the tone oflydg’s repli. but let the wise be warn against too great readinessat explan: it multipli the sourc of mistak, lengthen thesum for reckon sure to go wrong.lydgat smile as he end hi speech, put hi foot into thestirrup, and mr. mawmsei laugh more than he would have done if he hadknown who the king’s lieg were, give hi “good morn, sir,good-morn, sir,” with the air of on who saw everyth clearlyenough. but in truth hi view were perturb. for year he had beenpai bill with strictli made item, so that for everi half-crown andeighteen-penc he wa certain someth measur had been deliv.he had done thi with satisfact, includ it among hisrespons as a husband and father, and regard a longer billthan usual as a digniti worth mention. moreov, in addit to themass benefit of the drug to “self and famili,” he had enjoi thepleasur of form an acut judgment as to their immedi effect, soa to give an intellig statement for the guidanc of mr. gambit—apractition just a littl lower in statu than wrench or toller, andespeci esteem as an accoucheur, of whose abil mr. mawmsei hadth poorest opinion on all other point, but in doctor, he wa wontto sai in an underton, he place gambit abov ani of them.here were deeper reason than the superfici talk of a new man, whichappear still flimsier in the draw-room over the shop, when theywer recit to mr. mawmsei, a woman accustom to be made much of asa fertil mother,—gener under attend more or less frequent frommr. gambit, and occasion have attack which requir dr. minchin.“doe thi mr. lydgat mean to sai there is no us in take medicin?”said mr. mawmsei, who wa slightli given to drawl. “i should likehim to tell me how i could bear up at fair time, if i didn’t takestrengthen medicin for a month beforehand. think of what i have toprovid for call custom, my dear!”—here mr. mawmsei turn to anintim femal friend who sat by—“a larg veal pie—a stuf fillet—around of beef—ham, tongu, et cetera, et cetera! but what keep me upbest is the pink mixtur, not the brown. i wonder, mr. mawmsei, with_your_ experi, you could have patienc to listen. i should havetold him at onc that i knew a littl better than that.”“no, no, no,” said mr. mawmsei; “i wa not go to tell him myopinion. hear everyth and judg for yourself is my motto. but hedidn’t know who he wa talk to. i wa not to be turn on _hi_finger. peopl often pretend to tell me thing, when thei might as wellsai, ‘mawmsei, you’re a fool.’ but i smile at it: i humor everybodi’sweak place. if physic had done harm to self and famili, i should havefound it out by thi time.”the next dai mr. gambit wa told that lydgat went about sai physicwa of no us.“inde!” said he, lift hi eyebrow with cautiou surpris. (he wasa stout huski man with a larg ring on hi fourth finger.) “how will hecur hi patient, then?”“that is what i sai,” return mr. mawmsei, who habitu gave weightto her speech by load her pronoun. “doe _he_ suppos that peoplewil pai him onli to come and sit with them and go awai again?”mr. mawmsei had had a great deal of sit from mr. gambit, includingveri full account of hi own habit of bodi and other affair; but ofcours he knew there wa no innuendo in her remark, sinc hi sparetim and person narr had never been charg for. so he repli,humor—“well, lydgat is a good-look young fellow, you know.”“not on that _i_ would emploi,” said mr. mawmsei. “_other_ mai do asthei pleas.”henc mr. gambit could go awai from the chief grocer’s without fear ofrivalri, but not without a sens that lydgat wa on of thosehypocrit who try to discredit other by advertis their ownhonesti, and that it might be worth some peopl’s while to show him up.mr. gambit, howev, had a satisfactori practic, much pervad by thesmel of retail trade which suggest the reduct of cash paymentsto a balanc. and he did not think it worth hi while to show lydgateup until he knew how. he had not inde great resourc of educ,and had had to work hi own wai against a good deal of professionalcontempt; but he made none the wors accoucheur for call thebreath apparatu “long.”other medic men felt themselv more capabl. mr. toller share thehighest practic in the town and belong to an old middlemarch famili:there were toller in the law and everyth els abov the line ofretail trade. unlik our irasc friend wrench, he had the easiestwai in the world of take thing which might be suppos to annoi him,be a well-bred, quietli faceti man, who kept a good hous, wasveri fond of a littl sport when he could get it, veri friendli withmr. hawlei, and hostil to mr. bulstrod. it mai seem odd that withsuch pleasant habit he should have been given to the heroic treatment,bleed and blister and starv hi patient, with a dispassionatedisregard to hi person exampl; but the incongru favor theopinion of hi abil among hi patient, who commonli observ thatmr. toller had lazi manner, but hi treatment wa as activ as youcould desir: no man, said thei, carri more serious into hisprofess: he wa a littl slow in come, but when he came, he _did_someth. he wa a great favorit in hi own circl, and whatev heimpli to ani on’s disadvantag told doubli from hi carelessiron tone.he natur got tire of smile and sai, “ah!” when he wa toldthat mr. peacock’s successor did not mean to dispens medicin; andmr. hackbutt on dai mention it over the wine at a dinner-parti, mr.toller said, laughingli, “dibbitt will get rid of hi stale drug,then. i’m fond of littl dibbitt—i’m glad he’s in luck.”“i see your mean, toller,” said mr. hackbutt, “and i am entir ofyour opinion. i shall take an opportun of express myself to thateffect. a medic man should be respons for the qualiti of thedrug consum by hi patient. that is the rational of the system ofcharg which ha hitherto obtain; and noth is more offensivethan thi ostent of reform, where there is no real amelior.”“ostent, hackbutt?” said mr. toller, iron. “i don’t seethat. a man can’t veri well be ostentati of what nobodi believ in.there’s no reform in the matter: the question is, whether the profit onth drug is paid to the medic man by the druggist or by the patient,and whether there shall be extra pai under the name of attend.”“ah, to be sure; on of your damn new version of old humbug,” saidmr. hawlei, pass the decant to mr. wrench.mr. wrench, gener abstemi, often drank wine rather freeli at aparti, get the more irrit in consequ.“as to humbug, hawlei,” he said, “that’s a word easi to fling about.but what i contend against is the wai medic men ar foul their ownnest, and set up a cry about the countri as if a generalpractition who dispens drug couldn’t be a gentleman. i throw backth imput with scorn. i sai, the most ungentlemanli trick a mancan be guilti of is to come among the member of hi profess withinnov which ar a libel on their time-honor procedur. that ismi opinion, and i am readi to maintain it against ani on whocontradict me.” mr. wrench’s voic had becom exceedingli sharp.“i can’t oblig you there, wrench,” said mr. hawlei, thrust hishand into hi trouser-pocket.“my dear fellow,” said mr. toller, strike in pacif, and lookingat mr. wrench, “the physician have their toe trodden on more than wehav. if you come to digniti it is a question for minchin and spragu.”“doe medic jurisprud provid noth against theseinfring?” said mr. hackbutt, with a disinterest desir to offerhi light. “how doe the law stand, eh, hawlei?”“noth to be done there,” said mr. hawlei. “i look into it forspragu. you’d onli break your nose against a damn judg’s decis.”“pooh! no need of law,” said mr. toller. “so far as practic isconcern the attempt is an absurd. no patient will likeit—certainli not peacock’s, who have been us to deplet. pass thewin.”mr. toller’s predict wa partli verifi. if mr. and mr. mawmsei,who had no idea of emploi lydgat, were made uneasi by hi supposeddeclar against drug, it wa inevit that those who call himin should watch a littl anxious to see whether he did “us all themean he might us” in the case. even good mr. powderel, who in hisconst chariti of interpret wa inclin to esteem lydgat themor for what seem a conscienti pursuit of a better plan, had hismind disturb with doubt dure hi wife’s attack of erysipela, andcould not abstain from mention to lydgat that mr. peacock on asimilar occas had administ a seri of bolus which were nototherwis defin than by their remark effect in bring mr.powderel round befor michaelma from an ill which had begun in aremark hot august. at last, inde, in the conflict between hisdesir not to hurt lydgat and hi anxieti that no “mean” should belack, he induc hi wife privat to take widgeon’s purifyingpil, an esteem middlemarch medicin, which arrest everi diseaseat the fountain by set to work at onc upon the blood. thisco-oper measur wa not to be mention to lydgat, and mr.powderel himself had no certain relianc on it, onli hope that itmight be attend with a bless.but in thi doubt stage of lydgat’s introduct he wa help bywhat we mortal rashli call good fortun. i suppos no doctor ever camenewli to a place without make cure that surpris somebodi—cureswhich mai be call fortun’s testimoni, and deserv as much credita the written or print kind. variou patient got well while lydgatewa attend them, some even of danger ill; and it wasremark that the new doctor with hi new wai had at least the meritof bring peopl back from the brink of death. the trash talk onsuch occas wa the more vexati to lydgat, becaus it gaveprecis the sort of prestig which an incompet and unscrupulousman would desir, and wa sure to be imput to him by the simmeringdislik of the other medic men as an encourag on hi own part ofignor puf. but even hi proud outspoken wa check by thediscern that it wa as useless to fight against the interpretationsof ignor as to whip the fog; and “good fortun” insist on usingthos interpret.mr. larcher have just becom charit concern about alarmingsymptom in her charwoman, when dr. minchin call, ask him to seeher then and there, and to give her a certif for the infirmari;whereupon after examin he wrote a statement of the case as on oftumor, and recommend the bearer nanci nash as an out-patient. nanci,call at home on her wai to the infirmari, allow the stai maker andhi wife, in whose attic she lodg, to read dr. minchin’s paper, andbi thi mean becam a subject of compassion convers in theneighbor shop of churchyard lane as be afflict with a tumor atfirst declar to be as larg and hard as a duck’s egg, but later inth dai to be about the size of “your fist.” most hearer agre thatit would have to be cut out, but on had known of oil and anoth of“squitchin” as adequ to soften and reduc ani lump in the bodywhen taken enough of into the insid—the oil by gradual “soopl,”the squitchin by eat awai.meanwhil when nanci present herself at the infirmari, it happen tobe on of lydgat’s dai there. after question and examin her,lydgat said to the hous-surgeon in an underton, “it’s not tumor:it’s cramp.” he order her a blister and some steel mixtur, and toldher to go home and rest, give her at the same time a note to mr.larcher, who, she said, wa her best employ, to testifi that she wasin need of good food.but by-and-by nanci, in her attic, becam portent wors, thesuppos tumor have inde given wai to the blister, but onlywand to anoth region with angrier pain. the staymak’s wife wentto fetch lydgat, and he continu for a fortnight to attend nanci inher own home, until under hi treatment she got quit well and went towork again. but the case continu to be describ as on of tumor inchurchyard lane and other street—nai, by mr. larcher also; for whenlydg’s remark cure wa mention to dr. minchin, he naturallydid not like to sai, “the case wa not on of tumor, and i wa mistakenin describ it as such,” but answer, “inde! ah! i saw it wa asurg case, not of a fatal kind.” he had been inwardli annoi,howev, when he had ask at the infirmari about the woman he hadrecommend two dai befor, to hear from the hous-surgeon, ayoungst who wa not sorri to vex minchin with impun, exactli whathad occur: he privat pronounc that it wa indec in a generalpractition to contradict a physician’s diagnosi in that open manner,and afterward agre with wrench that lydgat wa disagreeablyinattent to etiquett. lydgat did not make the affair a ground forvalu himself or (veri particularli) despis minchin, suchrectif of misjudg often happen among men of equalqualif. but report took up thi amaz case of tumor, notclearli distinguish from cancer, and consid the more aw forb of the wander sort; till much prejudic against lydgat’smethod as to drug wa overcom by the proof of hi marvel skill inth speedi restor of nanci nash after she had been roll androl in agoni from the presenc of a tumor both hard andobstin, but nevertheless compel to yield.how could lydgat help himself? it is offens to tell a ladi when shei express her amaz at your skill, that she is altogethermistaken and rather foolish in her amaz. and to have enter intoth natur of diseas would onli have ad to hi breach of medicalproprieti. thu he had to winc under a promis of success given bythat ignor prais which miss everi valid qualiti.in the case of a more conspicu patient, mr. borthrop trumbul,lydgat wa consciou of have shown himself someth better than aneveri-dai doctor, though here too it wa an equivoc advantag that hewon. the eloqu auction wa seiz with pneumonia, and have beena patient of mr. peacock’s, sent for lydgat, whom he had express hisintent to patron. mr trumbul wa a robust man, a good subjectfor try the expect theori upon—watch the cours of aninterest diseas when left as much as possibl to itself, so thatth stage might be note for futur guidanc; and from the air withwhich he describ hi sensat lydgat surmis that he would liketo be taken into hi medic man’s confid, and be repres as apartn in hi own cure. the auction heard, without much surpris,that hi wa a constitut which (alwai with due watch) might beleft to itself, so as to offer a beauti exampl of a diseas withal it phase seen in clear delin, and that he probabl had therar strength of mind voluntarili to becom the test of a rationalprocedur, and thu make the disord of hi pulmonari function agener benefit to societi.mr. trumbul acquiesc at onc, and enter strongli into the viewthat an ill of hi wa no ordinari occas for medic scienc.“never fear, sir; you ar not speak to on who is altogetherignor of the _vi medicatrix_,” said he, with hi usual superiorityof express, made rather pathet by difficulti of breath. and hewent without shrink through hi abstin from drug, muchsustain by applic of the thermomet which impli theimport of hi temperatur, by the sens that he furnish objectsfor the microscop, and by learn mani new word which seem suitedto the digniti of hi secret. for lydgat wa acut enough toindulg him with a littl technic talk.it mai be imagin that mr. trumbul rose from hi couch with adisposit to speak of an ill in which he had manifest thestrength of hi mind as well as constitut; and he wa not backwardin award credit to the medic man who had discern the qualiti ofpati he had to deal with. the auction wa not an ungener man,and like to give other their due, feel that he could afford it. hehad caught the word “expect method,” and rang chime on thi andoth learn phrase to accompani the assur that lydgat “knew ath or two more than the rest of the doctor—wa far better vers inth secret of hi profess than the major of hi compeer.”thi had happen befor the affair of fred vinci’s ill had givento mr. wrench’s enmiti toward lydgat more definit person ground.the new-comer alreadi threaten to be a nuisanc in the shape ofrivalri, and wa certainli a nuisanc in the shape of practicalcritic or reflect on hi hard-driven elder, who had hadsometh els to do than to busi themselv with untri notion. hispractic had spread in on or two quarter, and from the first thereport of hi high famili had led to hi be pretti generallyinvit, so that the other medic men had to meet him at dinner in thebest hous; and have to meet a man whom you dislik is not observedalwai to end in a mutual attach. there wa hardli ever so muchunanim among them as in the opinion that lydgat wa an arrogantyoung fellow, and yet readi for the sake of ultim predomin toshow a crawl subservi to bulstrod. that mr. farebroth, whosenam wa a chief flag of the anti-bulstrod parti, alwai defendedlydg and made a friend of him, wa refer to farebroth’sunaccount wai of fight on both side.here wa plenti of prepar for the outburst of profession disgustat the announc of the law mr. bulstrod wa lai down for thedirect of the new hospit, which were the more exasper becausether wa no present possibl of interf with hi will andpleasur, everybodi except lord medlicot have refus help towardsth build, on the ground that thei prefer give to the oldinfirmari. mr. bulstrod met all the expens, and had ceas to besorri that he wa purchas the right to carri out hi notion ofimprov without hindranc from prejud coadjutor; but he hadhad to spend larg sum, and the build had linger. caleb garth hadundertaken it, had fail dure it progress, and befor the interiorfit were begun had retir from the manag of the busi;and when refer to the hospit he often said that howev bulstrodemight ring if you tri him, he like good solid carpentri and masonri,and had a notion both of drain and chimnei. in fact, the hospit hadbecom an object of intens interest to bulstrod, and he wouldwillingli have continu to spare a larg yearli sum that he might ruleit dictatori without ani board; but he had anoth favorit objectwhich also requir monei for it accomplish: he wish to bui someland in the neighborhood of middlemarch, and therefor he wish to getconsider contribut toward maintain the hospit. meanwhileh frame hi plan of manag. the hospit wa to be reserv forfev in all it form; lydgat wa to be chief medic superintend,that he might have free author to pursu all comparativeinvestig which hi studi, particularli in pari, had shown himth import of, the other medic visitor have a consultativeinflu, but no power to contraven lydgat’s ultim decis; andth gener manag wa to be lodg exclus in the hand offiv director associ with mr. bulstrod, who were to have vote inth ratio of their contribut, the board itself fill up anyvac in it number, and no mob of small contributor be admittedto a share of govern.there wa an immedi refus on the part of everi medic man in thetown to becom a visitor at the fever hospit.“veri well,” said lydgat to mr. bulstrod, “we have a capitalhous-surgeon and dispens, a clear-head, neat-hand fellow; we’llget webb from crabslei, as good a countri practition as ani of them,to come over twice a-week, and in case of ani except oper,prothero will come from brass. i must work the harder, that’s all,and i have given up my post at the infirmari. the plan will flourish inspit of them, and then thei’ll be glad to come in. thing can’t lasta thei ar: there must be all sort of reform soon, and then youngfellow mai be glad to come and studi here.” lydgat wa in highspirit.“i shall not flinch, you mai depend upon it, mr. lydgat,” said mr.bulstrod. “while i see you carri out high intent with vigor,you shall have my unfail support. and i have humbl confid thatth bless which ha hitherto attend my effort against the spiritof evil in thi town will not be withdrawn. suitabl director toassist me i have no doubt of secur. mr. brook of tipton ha alreadygiven me hi concurr, and a pledg to contribut yearli: he ha notspecifi the sum—probabl not a great on. but he will be a usefulmemb of the board.”a us member wa perhap to be defin as on who would originatenoth, and alwai vote with mr. bulstrod.the medic avers to lydgat wa hardli disguis now. neither dr.spragu nor dr. minchin said that he dislik lydgat’s knowledg, orhi disposit to improv treatment: what thei dislik wa hisarrog, which nobodi felt to be altogeth deniabl. thei impliedthat he wa insol, pretenti, and given to that recklessinnov for the sake of nois and show which wa the essenc of thecharlatan.the word charlatan onc thrown on the air could not be let drop. inthos dai the world wa agit about the wondrou do of mr. st.john long, “noblemen and gentlemen” attest hi extract of a fluidlik mercuri from the templ of a patient.mr. toller remark on dai, smilingli, to mr. taft, that “bulstrodehad found a man to suit him in lydgat; a charlatan in religion is sureto like other sort of charlatan.”“ye, inde, i can imagin,” said mr. taft, keep the number ofthirti stitch carefulli in her mind all the while; “there ar so manyof that sort. i rememb mr. cheshir, with hi iron, try to makepeopl straight when the almighti had made them crook.”“no, no,” said mr. toller, “cheshir wa all right—all fair and aboveboard. but there’s st. john long—that’s the kind of fellow we call acharlatan, advertis cure in wai nobodi know anyth about: afellow who want to make a nois by pretend to go deeper than otherpeopl. the other dai he wa pretend to tap a man’s brain and getquicksilv out of it.”“good graciou! what dread trifl with peopl’s constitut!”said mr. taft.after thi, it came to be held in variou quarter that lydgat playedeven with respect constitut for hi own purpos, and how muchmor like that in hi flighti experi he should make six andseven of hospit patient. especi it wa to be expect, as thelandladi of the tankard had said, that he would recklessli cut up theirdead bodi. for lydgat have attend mr. gobi, who di apparentlyof a heart-diseas not veri clearli express in the symptom, toodaringli ask leav of her rel to open the bodi, and thu gavean offenc quickli spread beyond parlei street, where that ladi hadlong resid on an incom such as made thi associ of her bodywith the victim of burk and hare a flagrant insult to her memori.affair were in thi stage when lydgat open the subject of thehospit to dorothea. we see that he wa bear enmiti and sillymisconcept with much spirit, awar that thei were partli creat byhi good share of success.“thei will not drive me awai,” he said, talk confidenti in mr.farebroth’s studi. “i have got a good opportun here, for the endsi care most about; and i am pretti sure to get incom enough for ourwant. by-and-by i shall go on as quietli as possibl: i have noseduct now awai from home and work. and i am more and moreconvinc that it will be possibl to demonstr the homogeneousorigin of all the tissu. raspail and other ar on the same track,and i have been lose time.”“i have no power of propheci there,” said mr. farebroth, who had beenpuf at hi pipe thoughtfulli while lydgat talk; “but as to thehostil in the town, you’ll weather it if you ar prudent.”“how am i to be prudent?” said lydgat, “i just do what come befor meto do. i can’t help peopl’s ignor and spite, ani more thanvesaliu could. it isn’t possibl to squar on’s conduct to sillyconclus which nobodi can forese.”“quit true; i didn’t mean that. i meant onli two thing. on is, keepyourself as separ from bulstrod as you can: of cours, you can goon do good work of your own by hi help; but don’t get ti. perhapsit seem like person feel in me to sai so—and there’s a good dealof that, i own—but person feel is not alwai in the wrong if youboil it down to the impress which make it simpli an opinion.”“bulstrod is noth to me,” said lydgat, carelessli, “except onpubl ground. as to get veri close unit to him, i am not fondenough of him for that. but what wa the other thing you meant?” saidlydg, who wa nurs hi leg as comfort as possibl, andfeel in no great need of advic.“why, thi. take care—_experto crede_—take care not to get hamperedabout monei matter. i know, by a word you let fall on dai, that youdon’t like my plai at card so much for monei. you ar right enoughther. but try and keep clear of want small sum that you haven’tgot. i am perhap talk rather superflu; but a man like toassum superior over himself, by hold up hi bad exampl andsermon on it.”lydgat took mr. farebroth’s hint veri cordial, though he wouldhardli have born them from anoth man. he could not help rememberingthat he had late made some debt, but these had seem inevit,and he had no intent now to do more than keep hous in a simpl wai.the furnitur for which he ow would not want renew; nor even thestock of wine for a long while.mani thought cheer him at that time—and justli. a man consciou ofenthusiasm for worthi aim is sustain under petti hostil by thememori of great worker who had to fight their wai not without wound,and who hover in hi mind as patron saint, invis help. at home,that same even when he had been chat with mr. farebroth, hehad hi long leg stretch on the sofa, hi head thrown back, and hishand clasp behind it accord to hi favorit rumin attitud,while rosamond sat at the piano, and plai on tune after anoth, ofwhich her husband onli knew (like the emot eleph he wa!) thatthei fell in with hi mood as if thei had been melodi sea-breez.there wa someth veri fine in lydgat’s look just then, and ani onemight have been encourag to bet on hi achiev. in hi dark eyesand on hi mouth and brow there wa that placid which come from theful of contempl thought—the mind not search, but behold,and the glanc seem to be fill with what is behind it.present rosamond left the piano and seat herself on a chair closeto the sofa and opposit her husband’s face.“is that enough music for you, my lord?” she said, fold her handsbefor her and put on a littl air of meek.“ye, dear, if you ar tire,” said lydgat, gentli, turn hi eyesand rest them on her, but not otherwis move. rosamond’s presenceat that moment wa perhap no more than a spoon brought to the lake,and her woman’s instinct in thi matter wa not dull.“what is absorb you?” she said, lean forward and bring herfac nearer to hi.he move hi hand and place them gentli behind her shoulder.“i am think of a great fellow, who wa about as old as i am threehundr year ago, and had alreadi begun a new era in anatomi.”“i can’t guess,” said rosamond, shake her head. “we us to plai atguess histor charact at mr. lemon’s, but not anatomist.”“i’ll tell you. hi name wa vesaliu. and the onli wai he could get toknow anatomi as he did, wa by go to snatch bodi at night, fromgraveyard and place of execut.”“oh!” said rosamond, with a look of disgust on her pretti face, “i amveri glad you ar not vesaliu. i should have thought he might findsom less horribl wai than that.”“no, he couldn’t,” said lydgat, go on too earnestli to take muchnotic of her answer. “he could onli get a complet skeleton bysnatch the whiten bone of a crimin from the gallow, andburi them, and fetch them awai by bit secretli, in the dead ofnight.”“i hope he is not on of your great hero,” said rosamond, halfplayfulli, half anxious, “els i shall have you get up in thenight to go to st. peter’s churchyard. you know how angri you told meth peopl were about mr. gobi. you have enemi enough alreadi.”“so had vesaliu, rosi. no wonder the medic fogi in middlemarch arejeal, when some of the greatest doctor live were fierc uponvesaliu becaus thei had believ in galen, and he show that galenwa wrong. thei call him a liar and a poison monster. but thefact of the human frame were on hi side; and so he got the better ofthem.”“and what happen to him afterward?” said rosamond, with someinterest.“oh, he had a good deal of fight to the last. and thei didexasper him enough at on time to make him burn a good deal of hiswork. then he got shipwreck just as he wa come from jerusalem totak a great chair at padua. he di rather miser.”there wa a moment’s paus befor rosamond said, “do you know, tertiu,i often wish you had not been a medic man.”“nai, rosi, don’t sai that,” said lydgat, draw her closer to him.“that is like sai you wish you had marri anoth man.”“not at all; you ar clever enough for anyth: you might easili havebeen someth els. and your cousin at quallingham all think that youhav sunk below them in your choic of a profess.”“the cousin at quallingham mai go to the devil!” said lydgat, withscorn. “it wa like their impud if thei said anyth of the sortto you.”“still,” said rosamond, “i do _not_ think it is a nice profess,dear.” we know that she had much quiet persever in her opinion.“it is the grandest profess in the world, rosamond,” said lydgat,grave. “and to sai that you love me without love the medic man inm, is the same sort of thing as to sai that you like eat a peachbut don’t like it flavor. don’t sai that again, dear, it pain me.”“veri well, doctor grave-face,” said rosi, dimpl, “i will declar infutur that i dote on skeleton, and bodi-snatcher, and bit of thingsin phial, and quarrel with everybodi, that end in your dyingmiser.”“no, no, not so bad as that,” said lydgat, give up remonstr andpet her resignedli.chapter xlvi.pue no podemo haber aquello que queremo, queramo aquello quepodremo.sinc we cannot get what we like, let us like what we can get.—_spanishproverb_.while lydgat, safe marri and with the hospit under hi command,felt himself struggl for medic reform against middlemarch,middlemarch wa becom more and more consciou of the nationalstruggl for anoth kind of reform.by the time that lord john russel’s measur wa be debat in thehous of common, there wa a new polit anim in middlemarch,and a new definit of parti which might show a decid chang ofbal if a new elect came. and there were some who alreadypredict thi event, declar that a reform bill would never becarri by the actual parliament. thi wa what will ladislaw dwelt onto mr. brook as a reason for congratul that he had not yet triedhi strength at the hust.“thing will grow and ripen as if it were a comet year,” said will.“the public temper will soon get to a cometari heat, now the questionof reform ha set in. there is like to be anoth elect beforelong, and by that time middlemarch will have got more idea into itshead. what we have to work at now is the ‘pioneer’ and politicalmeet.”“quit right, ladislaw; we shall make a new thing of opinion here,”said mr. brook. “onli i want to keep myself independ about reform,you know; i don’t want to go too far. i want to take up wilberforc’sand romilli’s line, you know, and work at negro emancip, criminallaw—that kind of thing. but of cours i should support grei.”“if you go in for the principl of reform, you must be prepar to takewhat the situat offer,” said will. “if everybodi pull for hi ownbit against everybodi els, the whole question would go to tatter.”“ye, ye, i agre with you—i quit take that point of view. i shouldput it in that light. i should support grei, you know. but i don’t wantto chang the balanc of the constitut, and i don’t think greywould.”“but that is what the countri want,” said will. “els there would beno mean in polit union or ani other movement that know whatit’s about. it want to have a hous of common which is not weightedwith nomine of the land class, but with repres of theother interest. and as to contend for a reform short of that, it islik ask for a bit of an avalanch which ha alreadi begun tothund.”“that is fine, ladislaw: that is the wai to put it. write that down,now. we must begin to get document about the feel of the countri,as well as the machin-break and gener distress.”“as to document,” said will, “a two-inch card will hold plenti. a fewrow of figur ar enough to deduc miseri from, and a few more willshow the rate at which the polit determin of the peopl isgrow.”“good: draw that out a littl more at length, ladislaw. that is anidea, now: write it out in the ‘pioneer.’ put the figur and deduceth miseri, you know; and put the other figur and deduc—and so on.you have a wai of put thing. burk, now:—when i think of burk, ican’t help wish somebodi had a pocket-borough to give you, ladislaw.you’d never get elect, you know. and we shall alwai want talent inth hous: reform as we will, we shall alwai want talent. thatavalanch and the thunder, now, wa realli a littl like burk. i wantthat sort of thing—not idea, you know, but a wai of put them.”“pocket-borough would be a fine thing,” said ladislaw, “if thei werealwai in the right pocket, and there were alwai a burk at hand.”will wa not displeas with that complimentari comparison, even frommr. brook; for it is a littl too try to human flesh to beconsci of express on’s self better than other and never to haveit notic, and in the gener dearth of admir for the rightth, even a chanc brai of applaus fall exactli in time is ratherfortifi. will felt that hi literari refin were usual beyondth limit of middlemarch percept; nevertheless, he wa beginningthoroughli to like the work of which when he began he had said tohimself rather languidli, “why not?”—and he studi the politicalsitu with as ardent an interest as he had ever given to poeticmetr or mediaev. it is undeni that but for the desir to bewher dorothea wa, and perhap the want of know what els to do,will would not at thi time have been medit on the need of theenglish peopl or criticis english statesmanship: he would probablyhav been rambl in itali sketch plan for sever drama, tryingpros and find it too jejun, try vers and find it tooartifici, begin to copi “bit” from old pictur, leav offbecaus thei were “no good,” and observ that, after all,self-cultur wa the princip point; while in polit he would havebeen sympath warmli with liberti and progress in gener. oursens of duti must often wait for some work which shall take the placeof dilettant and make us feel that the qualiti of our action is nota matter of indiffer.ladislaw had now accept hi bit of work, though it wa not thatindetermin loftiest thing which he had onc dream of as aloneworthi of continu effort. hi natur warm easili in the presenceof subject which were visibl mix with life and action, and theeasili stir rebellion in him help the glow of public spirit. inspit of mr. casaubon and the banish from lowick, he wa ratherhappi; get a great deal of fresh knowledg in a vivid wai and forpract purpos, and make the “pioneer” celebr as far asbrass (never mind the small of the area; the write wa notwors than much that reach the four corner of the earth).mr. brook wa occasion irrit; but will’s impati wasreliev by the divis of hi time between visit to the grang andretreat to hi middlemarch lodg, which gave varieti to hi life.“shift the peg a littl,” he said to himself, “and mr. brook might bein the cabinet, while i wa under-secretari. that is the common orderof thing: the littl wave make the larg on and ar of the samepattern. i am better here than in the sort of life mr. casaubon wouldhav train me for, where the do would be all laid down by apreced too rigid for me to react upon. i don’t care for prestig orhigh pai.”as lydgat had said of him, he wa a sort of gypsi, rather enjoi thesens of belong to no class; he had a feel of romanc in hisposit, and a pleasant conscious of creat a littl surprisewherev he went. that sort of enjoy had been disturb when he hadfelt some new distanc between himself and dorothea in their accidentalmeet at lydgat’s, and hi irrit had gone out toward mr.casaubon, who had declar beforehand that will would lose cast. “inev had ani cast,” he would have said, if that propheci had beenutt to him, and the quick blood would have come and gone likebreath in hi transpar skin. but it is on thing to like defianc,and anoth thing to like it consequ.meanwhil, the town opinion about the new editor of the “pioneer” wastend to confirm mr. casaubon’s view. will’s relationship in thatdistinguish quarter did not, like lydgat’s high connect, servea an advantag introduct: if it wa rumor that young ladislawwa mr. casaubon’s nephew or cousin, it wa also rumor that “mr.casaubon would have noth to do with him.”“brook ha taken him up,” said mr. hawlei, “becaus that is what noman in hi sens could have expect. casaubon ha devilish goodreason, you mai be sure, for turn the cold shoulder on a youngfellow whose bring-up he paid for. just like brook—on of thosefellow who would prais a cat to sell a hors.”and some odditi of will’s, more or less poetic, appear to supportmr. keck, the editor of the “trumpet,” in assert that ladislaw, ifth truth were known, wa not onli a polish emissari but crack-brain,which account for the preternatur quick and glib of hisspeech when he got on to a platform—as he did whenev he had anopportun, speak with a facil which cast reflect on solidenglishmen gener. it wa disgust to keck to see a strip of afellow, with light curl round hi head, get up and speechifi by thehour against institut “which had exist when he wa in hiscradl.” and in a lead articl of the “trumpet,” keck characterizedladislaw’s speech at a reform meet as “the violenc of anenergumen—a miser effort to shroud in the brillianc of fireworksth dare of irrespons statement and the poverti of a knowledgewhich wa of the cheapest and most recent descript.”“that wa a rattl articl yesterdai, keck,” said dr. spragu, withsarcast intent. “but what is an energumen?”“oh, a term that came up in the french revolut,” said keck.thi danger aspect of ladislaw wa strang contrast with otherhabit which becam matter of remark. he had a fond, half artist,half affection, for littl children—the smaller thei were ontoler activ leg, and the funnier their cloth, the better willlik to surpris and pleas them. we know that in rome he wa given torambl about among the poor peopl, and the tast did not quit him inmiddlemarch.he had somehow pick up a troop of droll children, littl hatless boyswith their galligaskin much worn and scant shirt to hang out,littl girl who toss their hair out of their ey to look at him,and guardian brother at the matur ag of seven. thi troop he had ledout on gypsi excurs to halsel wood at nut-time, and sinc thecold weather had set in he had taken them on a clear dai to gatherstick for a bonfir in the hollow of a hillsid, where he drew out asmal feast of gingerbread for them, and improvis a punch-and-judydrama with some privat home-made puppet. here wa on odditi. anotherwa, that in hous where he got friendli, he wa given to stretchhimself at full length on the rug while he talk, and wa apt to bediscov in thi attitud by occasion caller for whom such anirregular wa like to confirm the notion of hi danger mixedblood and gener laxiti.but will’s articl and speech natur recommend him in familieswhich the new strict of parti divis had mark off on the sideof reform. he wa invit to mr. bulstrod’s; but here he could not liedown on the rug, and mr. bulstrod felt that hi mode of talk aboutcathol countri, as if there were ani truce with antichrist,illustr the usual tendenc to unsound in intellectu men.at mr. farebroth’s, howev, whom the ironi of event had brought onth same side with bulstrod in the nation movement, will becam afavorit with the ladi; especi with littl miss nobl, whom itwa on of hi odditi to escort when he met her in the street withher littl basket, give her hi arm in the ey of the town, andinsist on go with her to pai some call where she distribut hersmal filch from her own share of sweet thing.but the hous where he visit oftenest and lai most on the rug waslydg’s. the two men were not at all alik, but thei agre none thewors. lydgat wa abrupt but not irrit, take littl notic ofmegrim in healthi peopl; and ladislaw did not usual throw awai hissuscept on those who took no notic of them. with rosamond, onth other hand, he pout and wa wayward—nai, often uncomplimentari,much to her inward surpris; nevertheless he wa gradual becomingnecessari to her entertain by hi companionship in her music, hisvari talk, and hi freedom from the grave preoccup which, withal her husband’s tender and indulg, often made hi mannersunsatisfactori to her, and confirm her dislik of the medicalprofess.lydgat, inclin to be sarcast on the superstiti faith of thepeopl in the efficaci of “the bill,” while nobodi care about the lowstat of patholog, sometim assail will with troublesom question.on even in march, rosamond in her cherri-color dress withswansdown trim about the throat sat at the tea-tabl; lydgat,late come in tire from hi outdoor work, wa seat sidewai on aneasi-chair by the fire with on leg over the elbow, hi brow look alittl troubl as hi ey rambl over the column of the “pioneer,”while rosamond, have notic that he wa perturb, avoid lookingat him, and inwardli thank heaven that she herself had not a moodydisposit. will ladislaw wa stretch on the rug contempl thecurtain-pole abstractedli, and hum veri low the note of “whenfirst i saw thy face;” while the hous spaniel, also stretch out withsmal choic of room, look from between hi paw at the usurp ofth rug with silent but strong object.rosamond bring lydgat hi cup of tea, he threw down the paper, andsaid to will, who had start up and gone to the tabl—“it’s no us your puf brook as a reform landlord, ladislaw:thei onli pick the more hole in hi coat in the ‘trumpet.’”“no matter; those who read the ‘pioneer’ don’t read the ‘trumpet,’”said will, swallow hi tea and walk about. “do you suppos thepubl read with a view to it own convers? we should have awitch’ brew with a vengeanc then—‘mingl, mingl, mingl, mingl,you that mingl mai’—and nobodi would know which side he wa go totak.”“farebroth sai, he doesn’t believ brook would get elect if theopportun came: the veri men who profess to be for him would bringanoth member out of the bag at the right moment.”“there’s no harm in try. it’s good to have resid member.”“why?” said lydgat, who wa much given to us that inconveni wordin a curt tone.“thei repres the local stupid better,” said will, laugh, andshak hi curl; “and thei ar kept on their best behavior in theneighborhood. brook is not a bad fellow, but he ha done some goodth on hi estat that he never would have done but for thisparliamentari bite.”“he’s not fit to be a public man,” said lydgat, with contemptuousdecis. “he would disappoint everybodi who count on him: i can seethat at the hospit. onli, there bulstrod hold the rein and driveshim.”“that depend on how you fix your standard of public men,” said will.“he’s good enough for the occas: when the peopl have made up theirmind as thei ar make it up now, thei don’t want a man—thei onli wanta vote.”“that is the wai with you polit writer, ladislaw—cry up ameasur as if it were a univers cure, and cry up men who ar apart of the veri diseas that want cure.”“why not? men mai help to cure themselv off the face of the landwithout know it,” said will, who could find reason impromptu, whenh had not thought of a question beforehand.“that is no excus for encourag the superstiti exagger ofhop about thi particular measur, help the cry to swallow itwhol and to send up vote popinjai who ar good for noth but tocarri it. you go against rotten, and there is noth morethoroughli rotten than make peopl believ that societi can be curedbi a polit hocu-pocu.”“that’s veri fine, my dear fellow. but your cure must begin somewher,and put it that a thousand thing which debas a popul can neverb reform without thi particular reform to begin with. look whatstanlei said the other dai—that the hous had been tinker longenough at small question of briberi, inquir whether thi or thatvot ha had a guinea when everybodi know that the seat have beensold wholesal. wait for wisdom and conscienc in publicag—fiddlestick! the onli conscienc we can trust to is the massivesens of wrong in a class, and the best wisdom that will work is thewisdom of balanc claim. that’s my text—which side is injur? isupport the man who support their claim; not the virtuou uphold ofth wrong.”“that gener talk about a particular case is mere question beg,ladislaw. when i sai, i go in for the dose that cure, it doesn’tfollow that i go in for opium in a given case of gout.”“i am not beg the question we ar upon—whether we ar to try fornoth till we find immacul men to work with. should you go on thatplan? if there were on man who would carri you a medic reform andanoth who would oppos it, should you inquir which had the bettermot or even the better brain?”“oh, of cours,” said lydgat, see himself checkmat by a movewhich he had often us himself, “if on did not work with such men asar at hand, thing must come to a dead-lock. suppos the worst opinionin the town about bulstrod were a true on, that would not make itless true that he ha the sens and the resolut to do what i thinkought to be done in the matter i know and care most about; but that isth onli ground on which i go with him,” lydgat ad rather proudli,bear in mind mr. farebroth’s remark. “he is noth to meotherwis; i would not cry him up on ani person ground—i would keepclear of that.”“do you mean that i cry up brook on ani person ground?” said willladislaw, nettl, and turn sharp round. for the first time he feltoffend with lydgat; not the less so, perhap, becaus he would havedeclin ani close inquiri into the growth of hi relat to mr.brook.“not at all,” said lydgat, “i wa simpli explain my own action. imeant that a man mai work for a special end with other whose motivesand gener cours ar equivoc, if he is quit sure of hi personalindepend, and that he is not work for hi privateinterest—either place or monei.”“then, why don’t you extend your liber to other?” said will,still nettl. “my person independ is as import to me as yoursi to you. you have no more reason to imagin that i have personalexpect from brook, than i have to imagin that you have personalexpect from bulstrod. motiv ar point of honor, isuppos—nobodi can prove them. but as to monei and place in the world,”will end, toss back hi head, “i think it is pretti clear that iam not determin by consider of that sort.”“you quit mistak me, ladislaw,” said lydgat, surpris. he had beenpreoccupi with hi own vindic, and had been blind to whatladislaw might infer on hi own account. “i beg your pardon forunintention annoi you. in fact, i should rather attribut to youa romant disregard of your own worldli interest. on the politicalquest, i refer simpli to intellectu bia.”“how veri unpleas you both ar thi even!” said rosamond. “icannot conceiv why monei should have been refer to. polit andmedicin ar suffici disagre to quarrel upon. you can both ofyou go on quarrel with all the world and with each other on thosetwo topic.”rosamond look mildli neutral as she said thi, rise to ring thebel, and then cross to her work-tabl.“poor rosi!” said lydgat, put out hi hand to her as she waspass him. “disput is not amus to cherub. have some music.ask ladislaw to sing with you.”when will wa gone rosamond said to her husband, “what put you out oftemp thi even, tertiu?”“me? it wa ladislaw who wa out of temper. he is like a bit oftind.”“but i mean, befor that. someth had vex you befor you came in,you look cross. and that made you begin to disput with mr. ladislaw.you hurt me veri much when you look so, tertiu.”“do i? then i am a brute,” said lydgat, caress her penit.“what vex you?”“oh, outdoor thing—busi.” it wa realli a letter insist on thepay of a bill for furnitur. but rosamond wa expect to have ababi, and lydgat wish to save her from ani perturb.chapter xlvii.wa never true love love in vain,for truest love is highest gain.no art can make it: it must springwher element ar foster.so in heaven’s spot and hourspr the littl nativ flower,downward root and upward ey,shapen by the earth and sky.it happen to be on a saturdai even that will ladislaw had thatlittl discuss with lydgat. it effect when he went to hi ownroom wa to make him sit up half the night, think over again, undera new irrit, all that he had befor thought of hi have settledin middlemarch and har himself with mr. brook. hesitationsbefor he had taken the step had sinc turn into suscept toeveri hint that he would have been wiser not to take it; and henc camehi heat toward lydgat—a heat which still kept him restless. wa henot make a fool of himself?—and at a time when he wa more than everconsci of be someth better than a fool? and for what end?well, for no definit end. true, he had dreami vision ofposs: there is no human be who have both passion andthought doe not think in consequ of hi passion—doe not findimag rise in hi mind which sooth the passion with hope or stingit with dread. but thi, which happen to us all, happen to some witha wide differ; and will wa not on of those whose wit “keep theroadwai:” he had hi bypath where there were littl joi of hi ownchoos, such as gentlemen canter on the highroad might havethought rather idiot. the wai in which he made a sort of happinessfor himself out of hi feel for dorothea wa an exampl of thi. itmai seem strang, but it is the fact, that the ordinari vulgar visionof which mr. casaubon suspect him—name, that dorothea might becomea widow, and that the interest he had establish in her mind mightturn into accept of him as a husband—had no tempt, arrestingpow over him; he did not live in the sceneri of such an event, andfollow it out, as we all do with that imagin “otherwis” which is ourpract heaven. it wa not onli that he wa unwil to entertainthought which could be accus of base, and wa alreadi uneasi inth sens that he had to justifi himself from the charg ofingratitud—the latent conscious of mani other barrier betweenhimself and dorothea besid the exist of her husband, had helpedto turn awai hi imagin from specul on what might befal mr.casaubon. and there were yet other reason. will, we know, could notbear the thought of ani flaw appear in hi crystal: he wa at onceexasper and delight by the calm freedom with which dorothealook at him and spoke to him, and there wa someth so exquisit inthink of her just as she wa, that he could not long for a changewhich must somehow chang her. do we not shun the street version of afin melodi?—or shrink from the new that the rariti—some bit ofchisel or engrav perhap—which we have dwelt on even withexult in the troubl it ha cost us to snatch glimps of it, isreal not an uncommon thing, and mai be obtain as an everi-daypossess? our good depend on the qualiti and breadth of our emot;and to will, a creatur who care littl for what ar call the solidth of life and greatli for it subtler influenc, to have withinhim such a feel as he had toward dorothea, wa like the inheritanceof a fortun. what other might have call the futil of hispass, made an addit delight for hi imagin: he wasconsci of a gener movement, and of verifi in hi ownexperi that higher love-poetri which had charm hi fanci.dorothea, he said to himself, wa forev enthron in hi soul: noother woman could sit higher than her footstool; and if he could havewritten out in immort syllabl the effect she wrought within him, hemight have boast after the exampl of old drayton, that,—“queen hereaft might be glad to liveupon the alm of her superflu prais.”but thi result wa question. and what els could he do fordorothea? what wa hi devot worth to her? it wa imposs totel. he would not go out of her reach. he saw no creatur among herfriend to whom he could believ that she spoke with the same simpleconfid as to him. she had onc said that she would like him tostai; and stai he would, whatev fire-breath dragon might hissaround her.thi had alwai been the conclus of will’s hesit. but he wasnot without contradictori and rebellion even toward hi ownresolv. he had often got irrit, as he wa on thi particularnight, by some outsid demonstr that hi public exert with mr.brook as a chief could not seem as heroic as he would like them to be,and thi wa alwai associ with the other ground of irrit—thatnotwithstand hi sacrific of digniti for dorothea’s sake, he couldhardli ever see her. whereupon, not be abl to contradict theseunpleas fact, he contradict hi own strongest bia and said, “iam a fool.”nevertheless, sinc the inward debat necessarili turn on dorothea,he end, as he had done befor, onli by get a liveli sens ofwhat her presenc would be to him; and suddenli reflect that themorrow would be sundai, he determin to go to lowick church and seeher. he slept upon that idea, but when he wa dress in the rationalmorn light, object said—“that will be a virtual defianc of mr. casaubon’s prohibit to visitlowick, and dorothea will be displeas.”“nonsens!” argu inclin, “it would be too monstrou for him tohind me from go out to a pretti countri church on a springmorn. and dorothea will be glad.”“it will be clear to mr. casaubon that you have come either to annoyhim or to see dorothea.”“it is not true that i go to annoi him, and why should i not go to seedorothea? is he to have everyth to himself and be alwayscomfort? let him smart a littl, as other peopl ar oblig to do.i have alwai like the quaint of the church and congreg;besid, i know the tucker: i shall go into their pew.”have silenc object by forc of unreason, will walk to lowicka if he had been on the wai to paradis, cross halsel common andskirt the wood, where the sunlight fell broadli under the buddingbough, bring out the beauti of moss and lichen, and fresh greengrowth pierc the brown. everyth seem to know that it wassundai, and to approv of hi go to lowick church. will easili felthappi when noth cross hi humor, and by thi time the thought ofvex mr. casaubon had becom rather amus to him, make hi facebreak into it merri smile, pleasant to see as the break of sunshineon the water—though the occas wa not exemplari. but most of us areapt to settl within ourselv that the man who block our wai isodi, and not to mind caus him a littl of the disgust which hisperson excit in ourselv. will went along with a small bookund hi arm and a hand in each side-pocket, never read, butchant a littl, as he made scene of what would happen in church andcom out. he wa experi in tune to suit some word of hisown, sometim try a readi-made melodi, sometim improvis. theword were not exactli a hymn, but thei certainli fit hi sundayexperi:—“o me, o me, what frugal cheer my love doth feed upon!a touch, a rai, that is not here, a shadow that is gone:“a dream of breath that might be near, an inli-echo tone,the thought that on mai think me dear, the place where on wa known,“the tremor of a banish fear, an ill that wa not done—o me, o me, what frugal cheer my love doth feed upon!”sometim, when he took off hi hat, shake hi head backward, andshow hi delic throat as he sang, he look like an incarnationof the spring whose spirit fill the air—a bright creatur, abundantin uncertain promis.the bell were still ring when he got to lowick, and he went intoth curat’s pew befor ani on els arriv there. but he wa stillleft alon in it when the congreg had assembl. the curat’s pewwa opposit the rector’s at the entranc of the small chancel, andwil had time to fear that dorothea might not come while he lookedround at the group of rural face which made the congreg from yearto year within the white-wash wall and dark old pew, hardli withmor chang than we see in the bough of a tree which break here andther with ag, but yet ha young shoot. mr. rigg’s frog-face wassometh alien and unaccount, but notwithstand thi shock toth order of thing, there were still the waul and the rural stock ofth powderel in their pew side by side; brother samuel’s cheek hadth same purpl round as ever, and the three gener of decentcottag came as of old with a sens of duti to their bettersgener—the smaller children regard mr. casaubon, who wore theblack gown and mount to the highest box, as probabl the chief of allbett, and the on most aw if offend. even in 1831 lowick wa atpeac, not more agit by reform than by the solemn tenor of thesundai sermon. the congreg had been us to see will at churchin former dai, and no on took much note of him except the choir, whoexpect him to make a figur in the sing.dorothea did at last appear on thi quaint background, walk up theshort aisl in her white beaver bonnet and grai cloak—the same she hadworn in the vatican. her face be, from her entranc, toward thechancel, even her shortsight ey soon discern will, but there wasno outward show of her feel except a slight pale and a grave bowa she pass him. to hi own surpris will felt suddenlyuncomfort, and dare not look at her after thei had bow to eachoth. two minut later, when mr. casaubon came out of the vestri,and, enter the pew, seat himself in face of dorothea, will felthi paralysi more complet. he could look nowher except at the choirin the littl galleri over the vestri-door: dorothea wa perhapspain, and he had made a wretch blunder. it wa no longer amus tovex mr. casaubon, who had the advantag probabl of watch him andse that he dare not turn hi head. why had he not imagin thisbeforehand?—but he could not expect that he should sit in that squarepew alon, unreliev by ani tucker, who had appar depart fromlowick altogeth, for a new clergyman wa in the desk. still he calledhimself stupid now for not forese that it would be imposs forhim to look toward dorothea—nai, that she might feel hi come animpertin. there wa no deliv himself from hi cage, howev;and will found hi place and look at hi book as if he had been aschool-mistress, feel that the morn servic had never been soimmeasur long befor, that he wa utterli ridicul, out oftemp, and miser. thi wa what a man got by worship the sightof a woman! the clerk observ with surpris that mr. ladislaw did notjoin in the tune of hanov, and reflect that he might have a cold.mr. casaubon did not preach that morn, and there wa no chang inwil’s situat until the bless had been pronounc and everi oneros. it wa the fashion at lowick for “the better” to go out first.with a sudden determin to break the spell that wa upon him, willlook straight at mr. casaubon. but that gentleman’s ey were on thebutton of the pew-door, which he open, allow dorothea to pass, andfollow her immedi without rais hi eyelid. will’s glancehad caught dorothea’s as she turn out of the pew, and again shebow, but thi time with a look of agit, as if she wererepress tear. will walk out after them, but thei went on towardsth littl gate lead out of the churchyard into the shrubberi, neverlook round.it wa imposs for him to follow them, and he could onli walk backsadli at mid-dai along the same road which he had trodden hopefulli inth morn. the light were all chang for him both without andwithin.chapter xlviii.sure the golden hour ar turn grayand danc no more, and vainli strive to run:i see their white lock stream in the wind—each face is haggard as it look at me,slow turn in the constant clasp roundstorm-driven.dorothea’s distress when she wa leav the church came chiefli fromth percept that mr. casaubon wa determin not to speak to hiscousin, and that will’s presenc at church had serv to mark morestrongli the alien between them. will’s come seem to her quiteexcus, nai, she thought it an amiabl movement in him toward areconcili which she herself had been constantli wish for. hehad probabl imagin, as she had, that if mr. casaubon and he couldmeet easili, thei would shake hand and friendli intercours mightreturn. but now dorothea felt quit rob of that hope. will wasbanish further than ever, for mr. casaubon must have been newlyembitt by thi thrust upon him of a presenc which he refus torecogn.he had not been veri well that morn, suffer from some difficultyin breath, and had not preach in consequ; she wa notsurpris, therefor, that he wa nearli silent at luncheon, still lessthat he made no allus to will ladislaw. for her own part she feltthat she could never again introduc that subject. thei usual spentapart the hour between luncheon and dinner on a sundai; mr. casaubonin the librari doze chiefli, and dorothea in her boudoir, where shewa wont to occupi herself with some of her favorit book. there wa alittl heap of them on the tabl in the bow-window—of variou sort,from herodotu, which she wa learn to read with mr. casaubon, toher old companion pascal, and kebl’s “christian year.” but to-dai sheopen on after anoth, and could read none of them. everythingseem dreari: the portent befor the birth of cyru—jewishantiqu—oh dear!—devout epigram—the sacr chime of favoritehymn—all alik were as flat as tune beaten on wood: even the springflow and the grass had a dull shiver in them under the afternooncloud that hid the sun fitfulli; even the sustain thought whichhad becom habit seem to have in them the weari of long futuredai in which she would still live with them for her sole companion.it wa anoth or rather a fuller sort of companionship that poordorothea wa hunger for, and the hunger had grown from the perpetualeffort demand by her marri life. she wa alwai try to be whather husband wish, and never abl to repos on hi delight in what shewa. the thing that she like, that she spontan care to have,seem to be alwai exclud from her life; for if it wa onli grantedand not share by her husband it might as well have been deni. aboutwil ladislaw there had been a differ between them from the first,and it had end, sinc mr. casaubon had so sever repulseddorothea’s strong feel about hi claim on the famili properti, byher be convinc that she wa in the right and her husband in thewrong, but that she wa helpless. thi afternoon the helpless wasmor wretchedli benumb than ever: she long for object who couldb dear to her, and to whom she could be dear. she long for workwhich would be directli benefic like the sunshin and the rain, andnow it appear that she wa to live more and more in a virtual tomb,where there wa the apparatu of a ghastli labor produc what wouldnev see the light. todai she had stood at the door of the tomb andseen will ladislaw reced into the distant world of warm activ andfellowship—turn hi face toward her as he went.book were of no us. think wa of no us. it wa sundai, and shecould not have the carriag to go to celia, who had late had a babi.there wa no refug now from spiritu empti and discont, anddorothea had to bear her bad mood, as she would have born a headach.after dinner, at the hour when she usual began to read aloud, mr.casaubon propos that thei should go into the librari, where, he said,he had order a fire and light. he seem to have reviv, and to bethink intent.in the librari dorothea observ that he had newli arrang a row ofhi note-book on a tabl, and now he took up and put into her hand awel-known volum, which wa a tabl of content to all the other.“you will oblig me, my dear,” he said, seat himself, “if instead ofoth read thi even, you will go through thi aloud, pencil inhand, and at each point where i sai ‘mark,’ will make a cross with yourpencil. thi is the first step in a sift process which i have longhad in view, and as we go on i shall be abl to indic to you certainprincipl of select wherebi you will, i trust, have an intelligentparticip in my purpos.”thi propos wa onli on more sign ad to mani sinc hi memorableinterview with lydgat, that mr. casaubon’s origin reluct to letdorothea work with him had given place to the contrari disposit,name, to demand much interest and labor from her.after she had read and mark for two hour, he said, “we will take thevolum up-stair—and the pencil, if you pleas—and in case of readingin the night, we can pursu thi task. it is not wearisom to you, itrust, dorothea?”“i prefer alwai read what you like best to hear,” said dorothea,who told the simpl truth; for what she dread wa to exert herself inread or anyth els which left him as joyless as ever.it wa a proof of the forc with which certain characterist indorothea impress those around her, that her husband, with all hisjealousi and suspicion, had gather implicit trust in the integr ofher promis, and her power of devot herself to her idea of theright and best. of late he had begun to feel that these qualiti werea peculiar possess for himself, and he want to engross them.the read in the night did come. dorothea in her young weari hadslept soon and fast: she wa awaken by a sens of light, which seemedto her at first like a sudden vision of sunset after she had climb asteep hill: she open her ey and saw her husband wrap in hi warmgown seat himself in the arm-chair near the fire-place where theember were still glow. he had lit two candl, expect thatdorothea would awak, but not like to rous her by more direct mean.“ar you ill, edward?” she said, rise immedi.“i felt some uneasi in a reclin postur. i will sit here for atim.” she threw wood on the fire, wrap herself up, and said, “youwould like me to read to you?”“you would oblig me greatli by do so, dorothea,” said mr. casaubon,with a shade more meek than usual in hi polit manner. “i amwak: my mind is remark lucid.”“i fear that the excit mai be too great for you,” said dorothea,rememb lydgat’s caution.“no, i am not consciou of undu excit. thought is easi.” dorotheadar not insist, and she read for an hour or more on the same plan assh had done in the even, but get over the page with morequick. mr. casaubon’s mind wa more alert, and he seem toanticip what wa come after a veri slight verbal indic,sai, “that will do—mark that”—or “pass on to the next head—i omitth second excursu on crete.” dorothea wa amaz to think of thebird-like speed with which hi mind wa survei the ground where ithad been creep for year. at last he said—“close the book now, my dear. we will resum our work to-morrow. i havedef it too long, and would gladli see it complet. but youobserv that the principl on which my select is made, is to giveadequ, and not disproportion illustr to each of the thesesenumer in my introduct, as at present sketch. you haveperceiv that distinctli, dorothea?”“ye,” said dorothea, rather tremul. she felt sick at heart.“and now i think that i can take some repos,” said mr. casaubon. helaid down again and beg her to put out the light. when she had laindown too, and there wa a dark onli broken by a dull glow on thehearth, he said—“befor i sleep, i have a request to make, dorothea.”“what is it?” said dorothea, with dread in her mind.“it is that you will let me know, deliber, whether, in case of mydeath, you will carri out my wish: whether you will avoid do whati should deprec, and appli yourself to do what i should desir.”dorothea wa not taken by surpris: mani incid had been lead herto the conjectur of some intent on her husband’s part which mightmak a new yoke for her. she did not answer immedi.“you refus?” said mr. casaubon, with more edg in hi tone.“no, i do not yet refus,” said dorothea, in a clear voic, the need offreedom assert itself within her; “but it is too solemn—i think iti not right—to make a promis when i am ignor what it will bind meto. whatev affect prompt i would do without promis.”“but you would us your own judgment: i ask you to obei mine; yourefus.”“no, dear, no!” said dorothea, beseechingli, crush by oppos fear.“but mai i wait and reflect a littl while? i desir with my whole soulto do what will comfort you; but i cannot give ani pledgesuddenli—still less a pledg to do i know not what.”“you cannot then confid in the natur of my wish?”“grant me till to-morrow,” said dorothea, beseechingli.“till to-morrow then,” said mr. casaubon.soon she could hear that he wa sleep, but there wa no more sleepfor her. while she constrain herself to lie still lest she shoulddisturb him, her mind wa carri on a conflict in which imaginationrang it forc first on on side and then on the other. she had nopresenti that the power which her husband wish to establish overh futur action had relat to anyth els than hi work. but itwa clear enough to her that he would expect her to devot herself tosift those mix heap of materi, which were to be the doubtfulillustr of principl still more doubt. the poor child hadbecom altogeth unbeliev as to the trustworthi of that keywhich had made the ambit and the labor of her husband’s life. it wasnot wonder that, in spite of her small instruct, her judgment inthi matter wa truer than hi: for she look with unbiassedcomparison and healthi sens at probabl on which he had riskedal hi egoism. and now she pictur to herself the dai, and month,and year which she must spend in sort what might be calledshatt mummi, and fragment of a tradit which wa itself amosa wrought from crush ruin—sort them as food for a theorywhich wa alreadi wither in the birth like an elfin child. doubtlessa vigor error vigor pursu ha kept the embryo of trutha-breath: the quest of gold be at the same time a question ofsubst, the bodi of chemistri is prepar for it soul, andlavoisi is born. but mr. casaubon’s theori of the element which madeth seed of all tradit wa not like to bruis itself unawaresagainst discoveri: it float among flexibl conjectur no moresolid than those etymolog which seem strong becaus of like insound until it wa shown that like in sound made them imposs:it wa a method of interpret which wa not test by the necessityof form anyth which had sharper collis than an elaboratenot of gog and magog: it wa as free from interrupt as a plan forthread the star togeth. and dorothea had so often had to checkher weari and impati over thi question riddl-guess, asit reveal itself to her instead of the fellowship in high knowledgewhich wa to make life worthier! she could understand well enough nowwhi her husband had come to cling to her, as possibl the onli hopeleft that hi labor would ever take a shape in which thei could begiven to the world. at first it had seem that he wish to keep evenh aloof from ani close knowledg of what he wa do; but graduallyth terribl stringenc of human need—the prospect of a too speedydeath—and here dorothea’s piti turn from her own futur to her husband’spast—nai, to hi present hard struggl with a lot which had grown outof that past: the lone labor, the ambit breath hardli under thepressur of self-distrust; the goal reced, and the heavier limb;and now at last the sword visibl trembl abov him! and had she notwish to marri him that she might help him in hi life’s labor?—butsh had thought the work wa to be someth greater, which she couldserv in devoutli for it own sake. wa it right, even to sooth hisgrief—would it be possibl, even if she promis—to work as in atreadmil fruitlessli?and yet, could she deni him? could she sai, “i refus to content thispin hunger?” it would be refus to do for him dead, what she wasalmost sure to do for him live. if he live as lydgat had said hemight, for fifteen year or more, her life would certainli be spent inhelp him and obei him.still, there wa a deep differ between that devot to the livingand that indefinit promis of devot to the dead. while he live, hecould claim noth that she would not still be free to remonstrateagainst, and even to refus. but—the thought pass through her mindmor than onc, though she could not believ in it—might he not mean todemand someth more from her than she had been abl to imagin, sinceh want her pledg to carri out hi wish without tell herexactli what thei were? no; hi heart wa bound up in hi work onli:that wa the end for which hi fail life wa to be ek out by her.and now, if she were to sai, “no! if you die, i will put no finger toyour work“—it seem as if she would be crush that bruis heart.for four hour dorothea lai in thi conflict, till she felt ill andbewild, unabl to resolv, prai mute. helpless as a childwhich ha sob and sought too long, she fell into a late morningsleep, and when she wake mr. casaubon wa alreadi up. tantripp toldher that he had read prayer, breakfast, and wa in the librari.“i never saw you look so pale, madam,” said tantripp, a solid-figuredwoman who had been with the sister at lausann.“wa i ever high-color, tantripp?” said dorothea, smile faintli.“well, not to sai high-color, but with a bloom like a chini rose. butalwai smell those leather book, what can be expect? do rest alittl thi morn, madam. let me sai you ar ill and not abl to gointo that close librari.”“oh no, no! let me make hast,” said dorothea. “mr. casaubon want meparticularli.”when she went down she felt sure that she should promis to fulfil hiswish; but that would be later in the dai—not yet.as dorothea enter the librari, mr. casaubon turn round from thetabl where he had been place some book, and said—“i wa wait for your appear, my dear. i had hope to set to workat onc thi morn, but i find myself under some indisposit,probabl from too much excit yesterdai. i am go now to take aturn in the shrubberi, sinc the air is milder.”“i am glad to hear that,” said dorothea. “your mind, i fear, wa tooactiv last night.”“i would fain have it set at rest on the point i last spoke of,dorothea. you can now, i hope, give me an answer.”“mai i come out to you in the garden present?” said dorothea, winninga littl breath space in that wai.“i shall be in the yew-tree walk for the next half-hour,” said mr.casaubon, and then he left her.dorothea, feel veri weari, rang and ask tantripp to bring her somewrap. she had been sit still for a few minut, but not in anyrenew of the former conflict: she simpli felt that she wa go tosai “ye” to her own doom: she wa too weak, too full of dread at thethought of inflict a keen-edg blow on her husband, to do anythingbut submit complet. she sat still and let tantripp put on her bonnetand shawl, a passiv which wa unusu with her, for she like towait on herself.“god bless you, madam!” said tantripp, with an irrepress movementof love toward the beauti, gentl creatur for whom she felt unableto do anyth more, now that she had finish ty the bonnet.thi wa too much for dorothea’s highli-strung feel, and she burstinto tear, sob against tantripp’s arm. but soon she checkedherself, dri her ey, and went out at the glass door into theshrubberi.“i wish everi book in that librari wa built into a caticom for yourmast,” said tantripp to pratt, the butler, find him in thebreakfast-room. she had been at rome, and visit the antiqu, asw know; and she alwai declin to call mr. casaubon anyth but“your master,” when speak to the other servant.pratt laugh. he like hi master veri well, but he like tantrippbett.when dorothea wa out on the gravel walk, she linger among thenear clump of tree, hesit, as she had done onc befor, thoughfrom a differ caus. then she had fear lest her effort atfellowship should be unwelcom; now she dread go to the spot wheresh foresaw that she must bind herself to a fellowship from which sheshrank. neither law nor the world’s opinion compel her to thi—onlyh husband’s natur and her own compass, onli the ideal and not thereal yoke of marriag. she saw clearli enough the whole situat, yetsh wa fetter: she could not smite the stricken soul that entreatedh. if that were weak, dorothea wa weak. but the half-hour waspass, and she must not delai longer. when she enter the yew-treewalk she could not see her husband; but the walk had bend, and shewent, expect to catch sight of hi figur wrap in a blue cloak,which, with a warm velvet cap, wa hi outer garment on chill dai forth garden. it occur to her that he might be rest in thesumm-hous, toward which the path diverg a littl. turn theangl, she could see him seat on the bench, close to a stone tabl.hi arm were rest on the tabl, and hi brow wa bow down onthem, the blue cloak be drag forward and screen hi face oneach side.“he exhaust himself last night,” dorothea said to herself, thinkingat first that he wa asleep, and that the summer-hous wa too damp aplac to rest in. but then she rememb that of late she had seen himtak that attitud when she wa read to him, as if he found iteasi than ani other; and that he would sometim speak, as well aslisten, with hi face down in that wai. she went into the summerhouseand said, “i am come, edward; i am readi.”he took no notic, and she thought that he must be fast asleep. shelaid her hand on hi shoulder, and repeat, “i am readi!” still he wasmotionless; and with a sudden confus fear, she lean down to him,took off hi velvet cap, and lean her cheek close to hi head, cryingin a distress tone—“wake, dear, wake! listen to me. i am come to answer.” but dorotheanev gave her answer.later in the dai, lydgat wa seat by her bedsid, and she wastalk deliri, think aloud, and recal what had gonethrough her mind the night befor. she knew him, and call him by hisnam, but appear to think it right that she should explain everythingto him; and again, and again, beg him to explain everyth to herhusband.“tell him i shall go to him soon: i am readi to promis. onli, thinkingabout it wa so dread—it ha made me ill. not veri ill. i shall soonb better. go and tell him.”but the silenc in her husband’s ear wa never more to be broken.chapter xlix.“a task too strong for wizard spellsthi squir had brought about;’t is easi drop stone in well,but who shall get them out?”“i wish to god we could hinder dorothea from know thi,” said sirjam chettam, with a littl frown on hi brow, and an express ofintens disgust about hi mouth.he wa stand on the hearth-rug in the librari at lowick grang, andspeak to mr. brook. it wa the dai after mr. casaubon had beenburi, and dorothea wa not yet abl to leav her room.“that would be difficult, you know, chettam, as she is an executrix,and she like to go into these thing—properti, land, that kind ofth. she ha her notion, you know,” said mr. brook, stick hisey-glass on nervous, and explor the edg of a fold paperwhich he held in hi hand; “and she would like to act—depend upon it,as an executrix dorothea would want to act. and she wa twenti-on lastdecemb, you know. i can hinder noth.”sir jame look at the carpet for a minut in silenc, and thenlift hi ey suddenli fix them on mr. brook, sai, “i willtel you what we can do. until dorothea is well, all busi must bekept from her, and as soon as she is abl to be move she must come tou. be with celia and the babi will be the best thing in the worldfor her, and will pass awai the time. and meanwhil you must get rid ofladislaw: you must send him out of the countri.” here sir jame’s lookof disgust return in all it intens.mr. brook put hi hand behind him, walk to the window andstraighten hi back with a littl shake befor he repli.“that is easili said, chettam, easili said, you know.”“my dear sir,” persist sir jame, restrain hi indign withinrespect form, “it wa you who brought him here, and you who keephim here—i mean by the occup you give him.”“ye, but i can’t dismiss him in an instant without assign reason,my dear chettam. ladislaw ha been invalu, most satisfactori. iconsid that i have done thi part of the countri a servic bybring him—by bring him, you know.” mr. brook end with a nod,turn round to give it.“it’s a piti thi part of the countri didn’t do without him, that’s alli have to sai about it. at ani rate, as dorothea’s brother-in-law, ifeel warrant in object strongli to hi be kept here by anyact on the part of her friend. you admit, i hope, that i have aright to speak about what concern the digniti of my wife’s sister?”sir jame wa get warm.“of cours, my dear chettam, of cours. but you and i have differentidea—differ—”“not about thi action of casaubon’s, i should hope,” interrupt sirjam. “i sai that he ha most unfairli compromis dorothea. i saythat there never wa a meaner, more ungentlemanli action than thi—acodicil of thi sort to a will which he made at the time of hismarriag with the knowledg and relianc of her famili—a positiveinsult to dorothea!”“well, you know, casaubon wa a littl twist about ladislaw. ladislawha told me the reason—dislik of the bent he took, you know—ladislawdidn’t think much of casaubon’s notion, thoth and dagon—that sort ofth: and i fanci that casaubon didn’t like the independ positionladislaw had taken up. i saw the letter between them, you know. poorcasaubon wa a littl buri in book—he didn’t know the world.”“it’s all veri well for ladislaw to put that color on it,” said sirjam. “but i believ casaubon wa onli jealou of him on dorothea’saccount, and the world will suppos that she gave him some reason; andthat is what make it so abomin—coupl her name with thi youngfellow’s.”“my dear chettam, it won’t lead to anyth, you know,” said mr.brook, seat himself and stick on hi ey-glass again. “it’s allof a piec with casaubon’s odditi. thi paper, now, ‘synopticaltabul’ and so on, ‘for the us of mr. casaubon,’ it wa lock upin the desk with the will. i suppos he meant dorothea to publish hisresearch, eh? and she’ll do it, you know; she ha gone into hisstudi uncommonli.”“my dear sir,” said sir jame, impati, “that is neither here norther. the question is, whether you don’t see with me the proprieti ofsend young ladislaw awai?”“well, no, not the urgenc of the thing. by-and-by, perhap, it maycom round. as to gossip, you know, send him awai won’t hindergossip. peopl sai what thei like to sai, not what thei have chapterand vers for,” said mr brook, becom acut about the truth thatlai on the side of hi own wish. “i might get rid of ladislaw up to acertain point—take awai the ‘pioneer’ from him, and that sort of thing;but i couldn’t send him out of the countri if he didn’t choos togo—didn’t choos, you know.”mr. brook, persist as quietli as if he were onli discuss thenatur of last year’s weather, and nod at the end with hi usualamen, wa an exasper form of obstinaci.“good god!” said sir jame, with as much passion as he ever show,“let us get him a post; let us spend monei on him. if he could go inth suit of some coloni governor! grampu might take him—and i couldwrit to fulk about it.”“but ladislaw won’t be ship off like a head of cattl, my dearfellow; ladislaw ha hi idea. it’s my opinion that if he were to partfrom me to-morrow, you’d onli hear the more of him in the countri. withhi talent for speak and draw up document, there ar few men whocould come up to him as an agit—an agit, you know.”“agit!” said sir jame, with bitter emphasi, feel that thesyl of thi word properli repeat were a suffici exposur ofit hate.“but be reason, chettam. dorothea, now. as you sai, she had bettergo to celia as soon as possibl. she can stai under your roof, and inth mean time thing mai come round quietli. don’t let us be fire offour gun in a hurri, you know. standish will keep our counsel, and thenew will be old befor it’s known. twenti thing mai happen to carryoff ladislaw—without my do anyth, you know.”“then i am to conclud that you declin to do anyth?”“declin, chettam?—no—i didn’t sai declin. but i realli don’t see whati could do. ladislaw is a gentleman.”“i am glad to hear it!” said sir jame, hi irrit make himforget himself a littl. “i am sure casaubon wa not.”“well, it would have been wors if he had made the codicil to hinderh from marri again at all, you know.”“i don’t know that,” said sir jame. “it would have been lessindel.”“on of poor casaubon’s freak! that attack upset hi brain a littl.it all goe for noth. she doesn’t _want_ to marri ladislaw.”“but thi codicil is frame so as to make everybodi believ that shedid. i don’t believ anyth of the sort about dorothea,” said sirjam—then frowningli, “but i suspect ladislaw. i tell you frankli, isuspect ladislaw.”“i couldn’t take ani immedi action on that ground, chettam. in fact,if it were possibl to pack him off—send him to norfolk island—thatsort of thing—it would look all the wors for dorothea to those whoknew about it. it would seem as if we distrust her—distrust her,you know.”that mr. brook had hit on an undeni argument, did not tend tosooth sir jame. he put out hi hand to reach hi hat, impli thath did not mean to contend further, and said, still with some heat—“well, i can onli sai that i think dorothea wa sacrif onc,becaus her friend were too careless. i shall do what i can, as herbroth, to protect her now.”“you can’t do better than get her to freshitt as soon as possibl,chettam. i approv that plan altogeth,” said mr. brook, well pleasedthat he had won the argument. it would have been highli inconveni tohim to part with ladislaw at that time, when a dissolut might happenani dai, and elector were to be convinc of the cours by which theinterest of the countri would be best serv. mr. brook sincerelybeliev that thi end could be secur by hi own return toparlia: he offer the forc of hi mind honestli to the nation.chapter l.“thi loller here wol precilen us somewhat.”“nai by my father’s soul! that schal he nat,”sayd the schipman, ‘here schal he not prech,we schal no gospel glosen here ne tech.we leven all in the gret god,’ quod he.he wolden sowen some diffculte.”—_canterburi tale_.dorothea had been safe at freshitt hall nearli a week befor she hadask ani danger question. everi morn now she sat with celia inth prettiest of up-stair sit-room, open into a smallconservatori—celia all in white and lavend like a bunch of mixedviolet, watch the remark act of the babi, which were sodubi to her inexperienc mind that all convers wa interruptedbi appeal for their interpret made to the oracular nurs.dorothea sat by in her widow’s dress, with an express which ratherprovok celia, as be much too sad; for not onli wa babi quitewel, but realli when a husband had been so dull and troublesom whileh live, and besid that had—well, well! sir jame, of cours, hadtold celia everyth, with a strong represent how import itwa that dorothea should not know it sooner than wa inevit.but mr. brook had been right in predict that dorothea would notlong remain passiv where action had been assign to her; she knew thepurport of her husband’s will made at the time of their marriag, andher mind, as soon as she wa clearli consciou of her posit, wassil occupi with what she ought to do as the owner of lowickmanor with the patronag of the live attach to it.on morn when her uncl paid hi usual visit, though with an unusualalacr in hi manner which he account for by sai that it wa nowpretti certain parliament would be dissolv forthwith, dorothea said—“uncl, it is right now that i should consid who is to have theliv at lowick. after mr. tucker had been provid for, i never heardmi husband sai that he had ani clergyman in hi mind as a successor tohimself. i think i ought to have the kei now and go to lowick toexamin all my husband’s paper. there mai be someth that wouldthrow light on hi wish.”“no hurri, my dear,” said mr. brook, quietli. “by-and-by, you know,you can go, if you like. but i cast my ey over thing in the desksand drawer—there wa noth—noth but deep subject, youknow—besid the will. everyth can be done by-and-by. as to theliv, i have had an applic for interest alreadi—i should sayrath good. mr. tyke ha been strongli recommend to me—i hadsometh to do with get him an appoint befor. an apostolicman, i believ—the sort of thing that would suit you, my dear.”“i should like to have fuller knowledg about him, uncl, and judg formyself, if mr. casaubon ha not left ani express of hi wish. heha perhap made some addit to hi will—there mai be someinstruct for me,” said dorothea, who had all the while had thisconjectur in her mind with relat to her husband’s work.“noth about the rectori, my dear—noth,” said mr. brook, risingto go awai, and put out hi hand to hi niec: “nor about hisresearch, you know. noth in the will.”dorothea’s lip quiver.“come, you must not think of these thing yet, my dear. by-and-by, youknow.”“i am quit well now, uncl; i wish to exert myself.”“well, well, we shall see. but i must run awai now—i have no end ofwork now—it’s a crisi—a polit crisi, you know. and here is celiaand her littl man—you ar an aunt, you know, now, and i am a sort ofgrandfath,” said mr. brook, with placid hurri, anxiou to get awayand tell chettam that it would not be hi (mr. brook’s) fault ifdorothea insist on look into everyth.dorothea sank back in her chair when her uncl had left the room, andcast her ey down medit on her cross hand.“look, dodo! look at him! did you ever see anyth like that?” saidcelia, in her comfort staccato.“what, kitti?” said dorothea, lift her ey rather absent.“what? why, hi upper lip; see how he is draw it down, as if hemeant to make a face. isn’t it wonder! he mai have hi littlethought. i wish nurs were here. do look at him.”a larg tear which had been for some time gather, roll downdorothea’s cheek as she look up and tri to smile.“don’t be sad, dodo; kiss babi. what ar you brood over so? i amsur you did everyth, and a great deal too much. you should be happynow.”“i wonder if sir jame would drive me to lowick. i want to look overeveryth—to see if there were ani word written for me.”“you ar not to go till mr. lydgat sai you mai go. and he ha notsaid so yet (here you ar, nurs; take babi and walk up and down thegalleri). besid, you have got a wrong notion in your head as usual,dodo—i can see that: it vex me.”“where am i wrong, kitti?” said dorothea, quit meekli. she wa almostreadi now to think celia wiser than herself, and wa realli wonderingwith some fear what her wrong notion wa. celia felt her advantag, andwa determin to us it. none of them knew dodo as well as she did, orknew how to manag her. sinc celia’s babi wa born, she had had a newsens of her mental solid and calm wisdom. it seem clear thatwher there wa a babi, thing were right enough, and that error, ingener, wa a mere lack of that central pois forc.“i can see what you ar think of as well as can be, dodo,” saidcelia. “you ar want to find out if there is anyth uncomfortablefor you to do now, onli becaus mr. casaubon wish it. as if you hadnot been uncomfort enough befor. and he doesn’t deserv it, andyou will find that out. he ha behav veri badli. jame is as angrywith him as can be. and i had better tell you, to prepar you.”“celia,” said dorothea, entreatingli, “you distress me. tell me at oncewhat you mean.” it glanc through her mind that mr. casaubon had leftth properti awai from her—which would not be so veri distress.“why, he ha made a codicil to hi will, to sai the properti wa all togo awai from you if you marri—i mean—”“that is of no consequ,” said dorothea, break in impetu.“but if you marri mr. ladislaw, not anybodi els,” celia went on withpersev quietud. “of cours that is of no consequ in onewai—you never _would_ marri mr. ladislaw; but that onli make it worseof mr. casaubon.”the blood rush to dorothea’s face and neck painfulli. but celia wasadminist what she thought a sober dose of fact. it wa takingup notion that had done dodo’s health so much harm. so she went on inher neutral tone, as if she had been remark on babi’s robe.“jame sai so. he sai it is abomin, and not like a gentleman. andther never wa a better judg than jame. it is as if mr. casaubonw to make peopl believ that you would wish to marri mr.ladislaw—which is ridicul. onli jame sai it wa to hinder mr.ladislaw from want to marri you for your monei—just as if he everwould think of make you an offer. mr. cadwallad said you might aswel marri an italian with white mice! but i must just go and look atbabi,” celia ad, without the least chang of tone, throw a lightshawl over her, and trip awai.dorothea by thi time had turn cold again, and now threw herself backhelplessli in her chair. she might have compar her experi at thatmoment to the vagu, alarm conscious that her life wa take ona new form, that she wa undergo a metamorphosi in which memorywould not adjust itself to the stir of new organ. everyth waschang it aspect: her husband’s conduct, her own duteou feelingtoward him, everi struggl between them—and yet more, her wholerel to will ladislaw. her world wa in a state of convulsivechang; the onli thing she could sai distinctli to herself wa, thatsh must wait and think anew. on chang terrifi her as if it hadbeen a sin; it wa a violent shock of repuls from her departedhusband, who had had hidden thought, perhap pervert everyth shesaid and did. then again she wa consciou of anoth chang which alsomad her tremul; it wa a sudden strang yearn of heart towardswil ladislaw. it had never befor enter her mind that he could,under ani circumst, be her lover: conceiv the effect of thesudden revel that anoth had thought of him in that light—thatperhap he himself had been consciou of such a possibl,—and thiswith the hurri, crowd vision of unfit condit, andquest not soon to be solv.it seem a long while—she did not know how long—befor she heard celiasai, “that will do, nurs; he will be quiet on my lap now. you cango to lunch, and let garratt stai in the next room. what i think,dodo,” celia went on, observ noth more than that dorothea waslean back in her chair, and like to be passiv, “is that mr.casaubon wa spite. i never did like him, and jame never did. ithink the corner of hi mouth were dreadfulli spite. and now he hasbehav in thi wai, i am sure religion doe not requir you to makeyourself uncomfort about him. if he ha been taken awai, that is amerci, and you ought to be grate. we should not griev, should we,babi?” said celia confidenti to that unconsci centr and poiseof the world, who had the most remark fist all complet even toth nail, and hair enough, realli, when you took hi cap off, tomak—you didn’t know what:—in short, he wa bouddha in a western form.at thi crisi lydgat wa announc, and on of the first thing hesaid wa, “i fear you ar not so well as you were, mr. casaubon; havey been agit? allow me to feel your puls.” dorothea’s hand wa ofa marbl cold.“she want to go to lowick, to look over paper,” said celia. “sheought not, ought she?”lydgat did not speak for a few moment. then he said, look atdorothea. “i hardli know. in my opinion mr. casaubon should do whatwould give her the most repos of mind. that repos will not alwayscom from be forbidden to act.”“thank you,” said dorothea, exert herself, “i am sure that is wise.there ar so mani thing which i ought to attend to. why should i sither idl?” then, with an effort to recal subject not connect withher agit, she ad, abruptli, “you know everi on in middlemarch,i think, mr. lydgat. i shall ask you to tell me a great deal. i haveseri thing to do now. i have a live to give awai. you know mr.tyke and all the—” but dorothea’s effort wa too much for her; shebrok off and burst into sob.lydgat made her drink a dose of sal volatil.“let mr. casaubon do as she like,” he said to sir jame, whom heask to see befor quit the hous. “she want perfect freedom, ithink, more than ani other prescript.”hi attend on dorothea while her brain wa excit, had enabl himto form some true conclus concern the trial of her life. hefelt sure that she had been suffer from the strain and conflict ofself-repress; and that she wa like now to feel herself onli inanoth sort of pinfold than that from which she had been releas.lydgat’s advic wa all the easier for sir jame to follow when hefound that celia had alreadi told dorothea the unpleas fact aboutth will. there wa no help for it now—no reason for ani further delayin the execut of necessari busi. and the next dai sir jamescompli at onc with her request that he would drive her to lowick.“i have no wish to stai there at present,” said dorothea; “i couldhardli bear it. i am much happier at freshitt with celia. i shall beabl to think better about what should be done at lowick by look atit from a distanc. and i should like to be at the grang a littlewhil with my uncl, and go about in all the old walk and among thepeopl in the villag.”“not yet, i think. your uncl is have polit compani, and you arebett out of the wai of such do,” said sir jame, who at thatmoment thought of the grang chiefli as a haunt of young ladislaw’s.but no word pass between him and dorothea about the objectionablepart of the will; inde, both of them felt that the mention of itbetween them would be imposs. sir jame wa shy, even with men,about disagre subject; and the on thing that dorothea would havechosen to sai, if she had spoken on the matter at all, wa forbidden toher at present becaus it seem to be a further exposur of herhusband’s injustic. yet she did wish that sir jame could know whathad pass between her and her husband about will ladislaw’s moralclaim on the properti: it would then, she thought, be appar to hima it wa to her, that her husband’s strang indel proviso hadbeen chiefli urg by hi bitter resist to that idea of claim, andnot mere by person feel more difficult to talk about. also, itmust be admit, dorothea wish that thi could be known for will’ssake, sinc her friend seem to think of him as simpli an object ofmr. casaubon’s chariti. why should he be compar with an italiancarri white mice? that word quot from mr. cadwallad seem likea mock travesti wrought in the dark by an impish finger.at lowick dorothea search desk and drawer—search all her husband’splace of deposit for privat write, but found no paper addressedespeci to her, except that “synopt tabul,” which wasprob onli the begin of mani intend direct for herguid. in carri out thi bequest of labor to dorothea, as in allels, mr. casaubon had been slow and hesit, oppress in the planof transmit hi work, as he had been in execut it, by the senseof move heavili in a dim and clog medium: distrust of dorothea’scompet to arrang what he had prepar wa subdu onli by distrustof ani other redactor. but he had come at last to creat a trust forhimself out of dorothea’s natur: she could do what she resolv to do:and he willingli imagin her toil under the fetter of a promis toerect a tomb with hi name upon it. (not that mr. casaubon call thefutur volum a tomb; he call them the kei to all mytholog.) butth month gain on him and left hi plan belat: he had onli hadtim to ask for that promis by which he sought to keep hi cold graspon dorothea’s life.the grasp had slip awai. bound by a pledg given from the depth ofher piti, she would have been capabl of undertak a toil which herjudg whisper wa vain for all us except that consecr offaith which is a suprem us. but now her judgment, instead ofb control by duteou devot, wa made activ by theimbitt discoveri that in her past union there had lurk thehidden alien of secreci and suspicion. the live, suffer manwa no longer befor her to awaken her piti: there remain onli theretrospect of pain subject to a husband whose thought had beenlow than she had believ, whose exorbit claim for himself hadeven blind hi scrupul care for hi own charact, and made himdefeat hi own pride by shock men of ordinari honor. as for theproperti which wa the sign of that broken tie, she would have beenglad to be free from it and have noth more than her origin fortunewhich had been settl on her, if there had not been duti attach toownership, which she ought not to flinch from. about thi properti manytroubl question insist on rise: had she not been right inthink that the half of it ought to go to will ladislaw?—but wa itnot imposs now for her to do that act of justic? mr. casaubon hadtaken a cruelli effect mean of hinder her: even with indignationagainst him in her heart, ani act that seem a triumphant elud ofhi purpos revolt her.after collect paper of busi which she wish to examin, shelock up again the desk and drawer—all empti of person word forher—empti of ani sign that in her husband’s lone brood hi hearthad gone out to her in excus or explan; and she went back tofreshitt with the sens that around hi last hard demand and hi lastinjuri assert of hi power, the silenc wa unbroken.dorothea tri now to turn her thought toward immedi duti, andon of these wa of a kind which other were determin to remind herof. lydgat’s ear had caught eagerli her mention of the live, and assoon as he could, he reopen the subject, see here a possibl ofmak amend for the cast-vote he had onc given with anil-satisfi conscienc. “instead of tell you anyth about mr.tyke,” he said, “i should like to speak of anoth man—mr. farebroth,the vicar of st. botolph’s. hi live is a poor on, and give him astint provis for himself and hi famili. hi mother, aunt, andsist all live with him, and depend upon him. i believ he ha nevermarri becaus of them. i never heard such good preach as hi—suchplain, easi eloqu. he would have done to preach at st. paul’s crossaft old latim. hi talk is just as good about all subject:origin, simpl, clear. i think him a remark fellow: he ought tohav done more than he ha done.”“why ha he not done more?” said dorothea, interest now in all whohad slip below their own intent.“that’s a hard question,” said lydgat. “i find myself that it’suncommonli difficult to make the right thing work: there ar so manystr pull at onc. farebroth often hint that he ha got intoth wrong profess; he want a wider rang than that of a poorclergyman, and i suppos he ha no interest to help him on. he is veryfond of natur histori and variou scientif matter, and he ishamp in reconcil these tast with hi posit. he ha no moneyto spare—hardli enough to us; and that ha led him intocard-plai—middlemarch is a great place for whist. he doe plai formonei, and he win a good deal. of cours that take him into compani alittl beneath him, and make him slack about some thing; and yet,with all that, look at him as a whole, i think he is on of the mostblameless men i ever knew. he ha neither venom nor doubl in him,and those often go with a more correct outsid.”“i wonder whether he suffer in hi conscienc becaus of that habit,”said dorothea; “i wonder whether he wish he could leav it off.”“i have no doubt he would leav it off, if he were transplant intoplenti: he would be glad of the time for other thing.”“my uncl sai that mr. tyke is spoken of as an apostol man,” saiddorothea, medit. she wa wish it were possibl to restor thetim of primit zeal, and yet think of mr. farebroth with astrong desir to rescu him from hi chanc-gotten monei.“i don’t pretend to sai that farebroth is apostol,” said lydgat.“hi posit is not quit like that of the apostl: he is onli aparson among parishion whose live he ha to try and make better.practic i find that what is call be apostol now, is animpati of everyth in which the parson doesn’t cut the principalfigur. i see someth of that in mr. tyke at the hospit: a gooddeal of hi doctrin is a sort of pinch hard to make peopleuncomfort awar of him. besid, an apostol man at lowick!—heought to think, as st. franci did, that it is need to preach to thebird.”“true,” said dorothea. “it is hard to imagin what sort of notion ourfarm and labor get from their teach. i have been look intoa volum of sermon by mr. tyke: such sermon would be of no us atlowick—i mean, about imput righteous and the propheci in theapocalyps. i have alwai been think of the differ wai in whichchristian is taught, and whenev i find on wai that make it awid bless than ani other, i cling to that as the truest—i meanthat which take in the most good of all kind, and bring in the mostpeopl as sharer in it. it is sure better to pardon too much, thanto condemn too much. but i should like to see mr. farebroth and hearhim preach.”“do,” said lydgat; “i trust to the effect of that. he is veri muchbelov, but he ha hi enemi too: there ar alwai peopl who can’tforgiv an abl man for differ from them. and that monei-winningbusi is realli a blot. you don’t, of cours, see mani middlemarchpeopl: but mr. ladislaw, who is constantli see mr. brook, is agreat friend of mr. farebroth’s old ladi, and would be glad to singth vicar’s prais. on of the old ladi—miss nobl, the aunt—is awonderfulli quaint pictur of self-forget good, and ladislawgal her about sometim. i met them on dai in a back street: youknow ladislaw’s look—a sort of daphni in coat and waistcoat; and thislittl old maid reach up to hi arm—thei look like a coupledrop out of a romant comedi. but the best evid aboutfarebroth is to see him and hear him.”happili dorothea wa in her privat sit-room when thi conversationoccur, and there wa no on present to make lydgat’s innocentintroduct of ladislaw pain to her. as wa usual with him inmatt of person gossip, lydgat had quit forgotten rosamond’sremark that she thought will ador mr. casaubon. at that moment hewa onli care for what would recommend the farebroth famili; and hehad purpos given emphasi to the worst that could be said about thevicar, in order to forestal object. in the week sinc mr.casaubon’s death he had hardli seen ladislaw, and he had heard no rumorto warn him that mr. brook’s confidenti secretari wa a dangeroussubject with mr. casaubon. when he wa gone, hi pictur of ladislawling in her mind and disput the ground with that question of thelowick live. what wa will ladislaw think about her? would he hearof that fact which made her cheek burn as thei never us to do? andhow would he feel when he heard it?—but she could see as well asposs how he smile down at the littl old maid. an italian withwhit mice!—on the contrari, he wa a creatur who enter into everyon’s feel, and could take the pressur of their thought instead ofurg hi own with iron resist.chapter li.parti is natur too, and you shall seebi forc of logic how thei both agre:the mani in the on, the on in mani;all is not some, nor some the same as ani:genu hold speci, both ar great or small;on genu highest, on not high at all;each speci ha it differentia too,thi is not that, and he wa never you,though thi and that ar ay, and you and hear like as on to on, or three to three.no gossip about mr. casaubon’s will had yet reach ladislaw: the airseem to be fill with the dissolut of parliament and the comingelect, as the old wake and fair were fill with the rival clatterof itiner show; and more privat nois were taken littl noticeof. the famou “dry elect” wa at hand, in which the depth ofpubl feel might be measur by the low flood-mark of drink. willladislaw wa on of the busiest at thi time; and though dorothea’swidowhood wa continu in hi thought, he wa so far from wish tobe spoken to on the subject, that when lydgat sought him out to tellhim what had pass about the lowick live, he answer ratherwaspishli—“why should you bring me into the matter? i never see mr. casaubon,and am not like to see her, sinc she is at freshitt. i never gother. it is tori ground, where i and the ‘pioneer’ ar no more welcomethan a poacher and hi gun.”the fact wa that will had been made the more suscept by observingthat mr. brook, instead of wish him, as befor, to come to thegrang often than wa quit agreeabl to himself, seem now tocontr that he should go there as littl as possibl. thi wa ashuffl concess of mr. brook’s to sir jame chettam’s indignantremonstr; and will, awak to the slightest hint in thi direct,conclud that he wa to be kept awai from the grang on dorothea’saccount. her friend, then, regard him with some suspicion? theirfear were quit superflu: thei were veri much mistaken if theyimagin that he would put himself forward as a needi adventur tryingto win the favor of a rich woman.until now will had never fulli seen the chasm between himself anddorothea—until now that he wa come to the brink of it, and saw her onth other side. he began, not without some inward rage, to think ofgo awai from the neighborhood: it would be imposs for him toshow ani further interest in dorothea without subject himself todisagre imput—perhap even in her mind, which other mighttri to poison.“we ar forev divid,” said will. “i might as well be at rome; shewould be no farther from me.” but what we call our despair is oftenonli the pain eager of unf hope. there were plenti of reasonswhi he should not go—public reason why he should not quit hi post atthi crisi, leav mr. brook in the lurch when he need “coach”for the elect, and when there wa so much canvass, direct andindirect, to be carri on. will could not like to leav hi ownchessmen in the heat of a game; and ani candid on the right side,even if hi brain and marrow had been as soft as wa consist with agentlemanli bear, might help to turn a major. to coach mr. brookeand keep him steadili to the idea that he must pledg himself to votefor the actual reform bill, instead of insist on hi independenceand power of pull up in time, wa not an easi task. mr.farebroth’s propheci of a fourth candid “in the bag” had not yetbeen fulfil, neither the parliamentari candid societi nor anyoth power on the watch to secur a reform major see a worthynodu for interfer while there wa a second reform candidatelik mr. brook, who might be return at hi own expens; and thefight lai entir between pinkerton the old tori member, bagster thenew whig member return at the last elect, and brook the futureindepend member, who wa to fetter himself for thi occas onli.mr. hawlei and hi parti would bend all their forc to the return ofpinkerton, and mr. brook’s success must depend either on plumperswhich would leav bagster in the rear, or on the new mint of toryvot into reform vote. the latter mean, of cours, would beprefer.thi prospect of convert vote wa a danger distract to mr.brook: hi impress that waver were like to be allur bywav statement, and also the liabil of hi mind to stick afreshat oppos argument as thei turn up in hi memori, gave willladislaw much troubl.“you know there ar tactic in these thing,” said mr. brook; “meetingpeopl half-wai—temper your idea—sai, ‘well now, there’ssometh in that,’ and so on. i agre with you that thi is a peculiaroccas—the countri with a will of it own—polit union—that sortof thing—but we sometim cut with rather too sharp a knife, ladislaw.these ten-pound household, now: why ten? draw the linesomewher—ye: but why just at ten? that’s a difficult question, now,if you go into it.”“of cours it is,” said will, impati. “but if you ar to wait tillw get a logic bill, you must put yourself forward as arevolutionist, and then middlemarch would not elect you, i fanci. asfor trim, thi is not a time for trim.”mr. brook alwai end by agre with ladislaw, who still appearedto him a sort of burk with a leaven of shellei; but after an intervalth wisdom of hi own method reassert itself, and he wa again drawninto us them with much hope. at thi stage of affair he wasin excel spirit, which even support him under larg advanc ofmonei; for hi power of convinc and persuad had not yet beentest by anyth more difficult than a chairman’s speech introducingoth orat, or a dialogu with a middlemarch voter, from which hecam awai with a sens that he wa a tactician by natur, and that itwa a piti he had not gone earlier into thi kind of thing. he wa alittl consciou of defeat, howev, with mr. mawmsei, a chiefrepres in middlemarch of that great social power, the retailtrad, and natur on of the most doubt voter in theborough—will for hi own part to suppli an equal qualiti of tea andsugar to reform and anti-reform, as well as to agre impartiallywith both, and feel like the burgess of old that thi necess ofelect member wa a great burthen to a town; for even if there wereno danger in hold out hope to all parti beforehand, there wouldb the pain necess at last of disappoint respect peoplewhos name were on hi book. he wa accustom to receiv largeord from mr. brook of tipton; but then, there were mani ofpinkerton’s committe whose opinion had a great weight of groceri ontheir side. mr. mawmsei think that mr. brook, as not too “clever inhi intellect,” wa the more like to forgiv a grocer who gave ahostil vote under pressur, had becom confidenti in hi backparlor.“as to reform, sir, put it in a famili light,” he said, rattl thesmal silver in hi pocket, and smile affabl. “will it support mr.mawmsei, and enabl her to bring up six children when i am no more? iput the question _fictious_, know what must be the answer. verywel, sir. i ask you what, as a husband and a father, i am to do whengentlemen come to me and sai, ‘do as you like, mawmsei; but if you voteagainst us, i shall get my groceri elsewher: when i sugar my liquori like to feel that i am benefit the countri by maintainingtradesmen of the right color.’ those veri word have been spoken to me,sir, in the veri chair where you ar now sit. i don’t mean by yourhonor self, mr. brook.”“no, no, no—that’s narrow, you know. until my butler complain to me ofyour good, mr. mawmsei,” said mr. brook, soothingli, “until i hearthat you send bad sugar, spice—that sort of thing—i shall never orderhim to go elsewher.”“sir, i am your humbl servant, and greatli oblig,” said mr. mawmsei,feel that polit were clear up a littl. “there would be somepleasur in vote for a gentleman who speak in that honorablemann.”“well, you know, mr. mawmsei, you would find it the right thing to putyourself on our side. thi reform will touch everybodi by-and-by—athoroughli popular measur—a sort of a, b, c, you know, that must comefirst befor the rest can follow. i quit agre with you that you’vegot to look at the thing in a famili light: but public spirit, now.we’re all on famili, you know—it’s all on cupboard. such a thing as avot, now: why, it mai help to make men’s fortun at the cape—there’sno know what mai be the effect of a vote,” mr. brook end, with asens of be a littl out at sea, though find it still enjoy.but mr. mawmsei answer in a tone of decis check.“i beg your pardon, sir, but i can’t afford that. when i give a vote imust know what i am do; i must look to what will be the effect onmi till and ledger, speak respectfulli. price, i’ll admit, ar whatnobodi can know the merit of; and the sudden fall after you’ve boughtin currant, which ar a good that will not keep—i’ve never; myselfseen into the in and out there; which is a rebuk to human pride. buta to on famili, there’s debtor and creditor, i hope; thei’re notgo to reform that awai; els i should vote for thing stai asthei ar. few men have less need to cry for chang than i have,person speak—that is, for self and famili. i am not on of thosewho have noth to lose: i mean as to respect both in parishand privat busi, and nowai in respect of your honor self andcustom, which you wa good enough to sai you would not withdraw fromm, vote or no vote, while the articl sent in wa satisfactori.”after thi convers mr. mawmsei went up and boast to hi wifethat he had been rather too mani for brook of tipton, and that hedidn’t mind so much now about go to the poll.mr. brook on thi occas abstain from boast of hi tactic toladislaw, who for hi part wa glad enough to persuad himself that hehad no concern with ani canvass except the pure argumentativesort, and that he work no meaner engin than knowledg. mr. brook,necessarili, had hi agent, who understood the natur of themiddlemarch voter and the mean of enlist hi ignor on the sideof the bill—which were remark similar to the mean of enlist iton the side against the bill. will stop hi ear. occasionallyparlia, like the rest of our live, even to our eat and apparel,could hardli go on if our imagin were too activ about process.there were plenti of dirti-hand men in the world to do dirtybusi; and will protest to himself that hi share in bring mr.brook through would be quit innoc.but whether he should succe in that mode of contribut to themajor on the right side wa veri doubt to him. he had written outvari speech and memoranda for speech, but he had begun toperc that mr. brook’s mind, if it had the burthen of rememberingani train of thought, would let it drop, run awai in search of it, andnot easili come back again. to collect document is on mode of servingyour countri, and to rememb the content of a document is anoth.no! the onli wai in which mr. brook could be coerc into think ofth right argument at the right time wa to be well pli with themtil thei took up all the room in hi brain. but here there wa thedifficulti of find room, so mani thing have been taken inbeforehand. mr. brook himself observ that hi idea stood rather inhi wai when he wa speak.howev, ladislaw’s coach wa forthwith to be put to the test, forbefor the dai of nomin mr. brook wa to explain himself to theworthi elector of middlemarch from the balconi of the white hart,which look out advantag at an angl of the market-place,command a larg area in front and two converg street. it wa afin mai morn, and everyth seem hope: there wa someprospect of an understand between bagster’s committe and brook’s,to which mr. bulstrod, mr. standish as a liber lawyer, and suchmanufactur as mr. plymdal and mr. vinci, gave a solid whichalmost counterbalanc mr. hawlei and hi associ who sat forpinkerton at the green dragon. mr. brook, consciou of have weakenedth blast of the “trumpet” against him, by hi reform as a landlordin the last half year, and hear himself cheer a littl as he droveinto the town, felt hi heart toler light under hi buff-coloredwaistcoat. but with regard to critic occas, it often happen thatal moment seem comfort remot until the last.“thi look well, eh?” said mr. brook as the crowd gather. “i shallhav a good audienc, at ani rate. i like thi, now—thi kind of publicmad up of on’s own neighbor, you know.”the weaver and tanner of middlemarch, unlik mr. mawmsei, had neverthought of mr. brook as a neighbor, and were not more attach to himthan if he had been sent in a box from london. but thei listenedwithout much disturb to the speaker who introduc the candid,on of them—a polit personag from brass, who came to tellmiddlemarch it duti—spoke so fulli, that it wa alarm to think whatth candid could find to sai after him. meanwhil the crowd becamedens, and as the polit personag near the end of hi speech,mr. brook felt a remark chang in hi sensat while he stillhandl hi ey-glass, trifl with document befor him, and exchangedremark with hi committe, as a man to whom the moment of summon wasindiffer.“i’ll take anoth glass of sherri, ladislaw,” he said, with an easyair, to will, who wa close behind him, and present hand him thesuppos fortifi. it wa ill-chosen; for mr. brook wa an abstemiousman, and to drink a second glass of sherri quickli at no great intervalfrom the first wa a surpris to hi system which tend to scatter hisenergi instead of collect them. prai piti him: so mani englishgentlemen make themselv miser by speechifi on entir privateground! wherea mr. brook wish to serv hi countri by stand forparlia—which, inde, mai also be done on privat ground, butb onc undertaken doe absolut demand some speechifi.it wa not about the begin of hi speech that mr. brook wa at allanxi; thi, he felt sure, would be all right; he should have itquit pat, cut out as neatli as a set of couplet from pope. embarkingwould be easi, but the vision of open sea that might come after wasalarm. “and question, now,” hint the demon just wake up in hisstomach, “somebodi mai put question about the schedul.—ladislaw,” hecontinu, aloud, “just hand me the memorandum of the schedul.”when mr. brook present himself on the balconi, the cheer were quiteloud enough to counterbal the yell, groan, brai, and otherexpress of advers theori, which were so moder that mr. standish(decidedli an old bird) observ in the ear next to him, “thi looksdanger, by god! hawlei ha got some deeper plan than thi.” still,the cheer were exhilar, and no candid could look more amiablethan mr. brook, with the memorandum in hi breast-pocket, hi lefthand on the rail of the balconi, and hi right trifl with hisey-glass. the strike point in hi appear were hi buffwaistcoat, short-clip blond hair, and neutral physiognomi. he beganwith some confid.“gentlemen—elector of middlemarch!”thi wa so much the right thing that a littl paus after it seemednatur.“i’m uncommonli glad to be here—i wa never so proud and happi in mylif—never so happi, you know.”thi wa a bold figur of speech, but not exactli the right thing; for,unhappili, the pat open had slip awai—even couplet from pope mayb but “fall from us, vanish,” when fear clutch us, and aglass of sherri is hurri like smoke among our idea. ladislaw, whostood at the window behind the speaker, thought, “it’s all up now. theonli chanc is that, sinc the best thing won’t alwai do, flounderingmai answer for onc.” mr. brook, meanwhil, have lost other clew,fell back on himself and hi qualif—alwai an appropriategrac subject for a candid.“i am a close neighbor of your, my good friend—you’ve known me on thebench a good while—i’ve alwai gone a good deal into publicquest—machineri, now, and machin-break—you’re mani of youconcern with machineri, and i’ve been go into that late. itwon’t do, you know, break machin: everyth must go on—trade,manufactur, commerc, interchang of stapl—that kind of thing—sinceadam smith, that must go on. we must look all over theglob:—‘observ with extens view,’ must look everywher, ‘fromchina to peru,’ as somebodi sai—johnson, i think, ‘the rambler,’ youknow. that is what i have done up to a certain point—not as far asperu; but i’ve not alwai stai at home—i saw it wouldn’t do. i’vebeen in the levant, where some of your middlemarch good go—and then,again, in the baltic. the baltic, now.”ply among hi recollect in thi wai, mr. brook might have gotalong, easili to himself, and would have come back from the remotestsea without troubl; but a diabol procedur had been set up by theenemi. at on and the same moment there had risen abov the shouldersof the crowd, nearli opposit mr. brook, and within ten yard of him,the effigi of himself: buff-color waistcoat, ey-glass, and neutralphysiognomi, paint on rag; and there had arisen, appar in theair, like the note of the cuckoo, a parrot-like, punch-voic echo ofhi word. everybodi look up at the open window in the hous at theopposit angl of the converg street; but thei were either blank,or fill by laugh listen. the most innoc echo ha an impishmockeri in it when it follow a grave persist speaker, and thisecho wa not at all innoc; if it did not follow with the precisionof a natur echo, it had a wick choic of the word it overtook. byth time it said, “the baltic, now,” the laugh which had been runningthrough the audienc becam a gener shout, and but for the soberingeffect of parti and that great public caus which the entangl ofth had identifi with “brook of tipton,” the laugh might havecaught hi committe. mr. bulstrod ask, reprehens, what the newpolic wa do; but a voic could not well be collar, and an attackon the effigi of the candid would have been too equivoc, sincehawlei probabl meant it to be pelt.mr. brook himself wa not in a posit to be quickli consciou ofanyth except a gener slip awai of idea within himself: he hadeven a littl sing in the ear, and he wa the onli person who hadnot yet taken distinct account of the echo or discern the imag ofhimself. few thing hold the percept more thoroughli captiv thananxieti about what we have got to sai. mr. brook heard the laughter;but he had expect some tori effort at disturb, and he wa atthi moment addition excit by the tickl, sting sens thathi lost exordium wa come back to fetch him from the baltic.“that remind me,” he went on, thrust a hand into hi side-pocket,with an easi air, “if i want a preced, you know—but we never wanta preced for the right thing—but there is chatham, now; i can’t sayi should have support chatham, or pitt, the younger pitt—he wa not aman of idea, and we want idea, you know.”“blast your idea! we want the bill,” said a loud rough voic from thecrowd below.immedi the invis punch, who had hitherto follow mr. brook,repeat, “blast your idea! we want the bill.” the laugh wa louderthan ever, and for the first time mr. brook be himself silent,heard distinctli the mock echo. but it seem to ridicul hisinterrupt, and in that light wa encourag; so he repli withamen—“there is someth in what you sai, my good friend, and what do wemeet for but to speak our mind—freedom of opinion, freedom of thepress, liberti—that kind of thing? the bill, now—you shall have thebil”—here mr. brook paus a moment to fix on hi ey-glass and taketh paper from hi breast-pocket, with a sens of be practic andcom to particular. the invis punch follow:—“you shall have the bill, mr. brook, per election contest, and aseat outsid parliament as deliv, five thousand pound, sevenshil, and fourpenc.”mr. brook, amid the roar of laughter, turn red, let hi ey-glassfal, and look about him confusedli, saw the imag of himself, whichhad come nearer. the next moment he saw it dolor bespatt withegg. hi spirit rose a littl, and hi voic too.“buffooneri, trick, ridicul the test of truth—all that is verywel”—here an unpleas egg broke on mr. brook’s shoulder, as theecho said, “all that is veri well;” then came a hail of egg, chieflyaim at the imag, but occasion hit the origin, as if bychanc. there wa a stream of new men push among the crowd;whistl, yell, bellow, and fife made all the greater hubbubbecaus there wa shout and struggl to put them down. no voicewould have had wing enough to rise abov the uproar, and mr. brook,disagre anoint, stood hi ground no longer. the frustrationwould have been less exasper if it had been less gamesom andboyish: a seriou assault of which the newspap report “can averthat it endang the learn gentleman’s rib,” or can respectfullybear wit to “the sole of that gentleman’s boot have beenvis abov the rail,” ha perhap more consol attach toit.mr. brook re-enter the committe-room, sai, as carelessli as hecould, “thi is a littl too bad, you know. i should have got the earof the peopl by-and-by—but thei didn’t give me time. i should havegon into the bill by-and-by, you know,” he ad, glanc atladislaw. “howev, thing will come all right at the nomin.”but it wa not resolv unanim that thing would come right; onth contrari, the committe look rather grim, and the politicalpersonag from brass wa write busili, as if he were brew newdevic.“it wa bowyer who did it,” said mr. standish, evas. “i know it aswel as if he had been advertis. he’s uncommonli good atventriloqu, and he did it uncommonli well, by god! hawlei ha beenhav him to dinner late: there’s a fund of talent in bowyer.”“well, you know, you never mention him to me, standish, els i wouldhav invit him to dine,” said poor mr. brook, who had gone through agreat deal of invit for the good of hi countri.“there’s not a more paltri fellow in middlemarch than bowyer,” saidladislaw, indignantli, “but it seem as if the paltri fellow werealwai to turn the scale.”will wa thoroughli out of temper with himself as well as with hi“princip,” and he went to shut himself in hi room with ahalf-form resolv to throw up the “pioneer” and mr. brook togeth.why should he stai? if the impass gulf between himself and dorotheawer ever to be fill up, it must rather be by hi go awai andget into a thoroughli differ posit than by stai here andslip into deserv contempt as an understrapp of brook’s. thencam the young dream of wonder that he might do—in five year, forexampl: polit write, polit speak, would get a highervalu now public life wa go to be wider and more nation, and theymight give him such distinct that he would not seem to be askingdorothea to step down to him. five year:—if he could onli be sure thatsh care for him more than for other; if he could onli make her awarethat he stood aloof until he could tell hi love without loweringhimself—then he could go awai easili, and begin a career which atfiv-and-twenti seem probabl enough in the inward order of thing,where talent bring fame, and fame everyth els which is delight.he could speak and he could write; he could master ani subject if hechos, and he meant alwai to take the side of reason and justic, onwhich he would carri all hi ardor. why should he not on dai be liftedabov the shoulder of the crowd, and feel that he had won thatemin well? without doubt he would leav middlemarch, go to town,and make himself fit for celebr by “eat hi dinner.”but not immedi: not until some kind of sign had pass between himand dorothea. he could not be satisfi until she knew why, even if hewer the man she would choos to marri, he would not marri her. henceh must keep hi post and bear with mr. brook a littl longer.but he soon had reason to suspect that mr. brook had anticip himin the wish to break up their connect. deput without andvoic within had concur in induc that philanthropist to take astrong measur than usual for the good of mankind; name, towithdraw in favor of anoth candid, to whom he left the advantagesof hi canvass machineri. he himself call thi a strong measur,but observ that hi health wa less capabl of sustain excitementthan he had imagin.“i have felt uneasi about the chest—it won’t do to carri that too far,”he said to ladislaw in explain the affair. “i must pull up. poorcasaubon wa a warn, you know. i’ve made some heavi advanc, buti’ve dug a channel. it’s rather coars work—thi election, eh,ladislaw? dare sai you ar tire of it. howev, we have dug a channelwith the ‘pioneer’—put thing in a track, and so on. a more ordinaryman than you might carri it on now—more ordinari, you know.”“do you wish me to give it up?” said will, the quick color come inhi face, as he rose from the write-tabl, and took a turn of threestep with hi hand in hi pocket. “i am readi to do so whenev youwish it.”“as to wish, my dear ladislaw, i have the highest opinion of yourpow, you know. but about the ‘pioneer,’ i have been consult alittl with some of the men on our side, and thei ar inclin to takeit into their hand—indemnifi me to a certain extent—carri it on, infact. and under the circumst, you might like to give up—might finda better field. these peopl might not take that high view of you whichi have alwai taken, as an alter ego, a right hand—though i alwayslook forward to your do someth els. i think of have a runinto franc. but i’ll write you ani letter, you know—to althorp andpeopl of that kind. i’ve met althorp.”“i am exceedingli oblig to you,” said ladislaw, proudli. “sinc youar go to part with the ‘pioneer,’ i need not troubl you about thestep i shall take. i mai choos to continu here for the present.”after mr. brook had left him will said to himself, “the rest of thefamili have been urg him to get rid of me, and he doesn’t care nowabout my go. i shall stai as long as i like. i shall go of my ownmov and not becaus thei ar afraid of me.”chapter lii.“hi heartth lowliest duti on itself did lai.”—wordsworth.on that june even when mr. farebroth knew that he wa to have thelowick live, there wa joi in the old fashion parlor, and even theportrait of the great lawyer seem to look on with satisfact. hismoth left her tea and toast untouch, but sat with her usual prettyprim, onli show her emot by that flush in the cheek andbright in the ey which give an old woman a touch momentaryident with her far-off youth self, and sai decis—“the greatest comfort, camden, is that you have deserv it.”“when a man get a good berth, mother, half the deserv must comeaft,” said the son, brim of pleasur, and not try to concealit. the glad in hi face wa of that activ kind which seem tohav energi enough not onli to flash outwardli, but to light up busyvis within: on seem to see thought, as well as delight, in hisglanc.“now, aunt,” he went on, rub hi hand and look at miss nobl,who wa make tender littl beaver-like nois, “there shall besugar-candi alwai on the tabl for you to steal and give to thechildren, and you shall have a great mani new stock to makepres of, and you shall darn your own more than ever!”miss nobl nod at her nephew with a subdu half-frighten laugh,consciou of have alreadi drop an addit lump of sugar intoh basket on the strength of the new prefer.“as for you, winni”—the vicar went on—“i shall make no difficulti aboutyour marri ani lowick bachelor—mr. solomon featherston, forexampl, as soon as i find you ar in love with him.”miss winifr, who had been look at her brother all the while andcri heartili, which wa her wai of rejoic, smile through hertear and said, “you must set me the exampl, cam: _you_ must marrynow.”“with all my heart. but who is in love with me? i am a seedi oldfellow,” said the vicar, rise, push hi chair awai and lookingdown at himself. “what do you sai, mother?”“you ar a handsom man, camden: though not so fine a figur of a mana your father,” said the old ladi.“i wish you would marri miss garth, brother,” said miss winifr. “shewould make us so live at lowick.”“veri fine! you talk as if young women were ti up to be chosen, likepoultri at market; as if i had onli to ask and everybodi would havem,” said the vicar, not care to specifi.“we don’t want everybodi,” said miss winifr. “but _you_ would likemiss garth, mother, shouldn’t you?”“my son’s choic shall be mine,” said mr. farebroth, with majesticdiscret, “and a wife would be most welcom, camden. you will wantyour whist at home when we go to lowick, and henrietta nobl never wasa whist-player.” (mr. farebroth alwai call her tini old sister bythat magnific name.)“i shall do without whist now, mother.”“why so, camden? in my time whist wa thought an undeni amusementfor a good churchman,” said mr. farebroth, innoc of the meaningthat whist had for her son, and speak rather sharpli, as at somedanger countenanc of new doctrin.“i shall be too busi for whist; i shall have two parish,” said thevicar, prefer not to discuss the virtu of that game.he had alreadi said to dorothea, “i don’t feel bound to give up st.botolph’s. it is protest enough against the plural thei want toreform if i give somebodi els most of the monei. the stronger thing isnot to give up power, but to us it well.”“i have thought of that,” said dorothea. “so far as self is concern,i think it would be easier to give up power and monei than to keepthem. it seem veri unfit that i should have thi patronag, yet ifelt that i ought not to let it be us by some on els instead ofm.”“it is i who am bound to act so that you will not regret your power,”said mr. farebroth.hi wa on of the natur in which conscienc get the more activewhen the yoke of life ceas to gall them. he made no displai ofhumil on the subject, but in hi heart he felt rather asham thathi conduct had shown lach which other who did not get beneficeswer free from.“i us often to wish i had been someth els than a clergyman,” hesaid to lydgat, “but perhap it will be better to try and make as gooda clergyman out of myself as i can. that is the well-benef point ofview, you perceiv, from which difficulti ar much simplifi,” heend, smile.the vicar did feel then as if hi share of duti would be easi. butduti ha a trick of behav unexpectedli—someth like a heavi friendwhom we have amiabl ask to visit us, and who break hi leg withinour gate.hardli a week later, duti present itself in hi studi under thedisguis of fred vinci, now return from omnibu colleg with hisbachelor’s degre.“i am asham to troubl you, mr. farebroth,” said fred, whose fairopen face wa propiti, “but you ar the onli friend i can consult.i told you everyth onc befor, and you were so good that i can’thelp come to you again.”“sit down, fred, i’m readi to hear and do anyth i can,” said thevicar, who wa busi pack some small object for remov, and went onwith hi work.“i want to tell you—” fred hesit an instant and then went onplungingli, “i might go into the church now; and realli, look where imai, i can’t see anyth els to do. i don’t like it, but i know it’suncommonli hard on my father to sai so, after he ha spent a good dealof monei in educ me for it.” fred paus again an instant, andthen repeat, “and i can’t see anyth els to do.”“i did talk to your father about it, fred, but i made littl wai withhim. he said it wa too late. but you have got over on bridg now:what ar your other difficulti?”“mere that i don’t like it. i don’t like divin, and preach, andfeel oblig to look seriou. i like ride across countri, anddo as other men do. i don’t mean that i want to be a bad fellow inani wai; but i’ve no tast for the sort of thing peopl expect of aclergyman. and yet what els am i to do? my father can’t spare me anycapit, els i might go into farm. and he ha no room for me in histrad. and of cours i can’t begin to studi for law or physic now, whenmi father want me to earn someth. it’s all veri well to sai i’mwrong to go into the church; but those who sai so might as well tell meto go into the backwood.”fred’s voic had taken a tone of grumbl remonstr, and mr.farebroth might have been inclin to smile if hi mind had not beentoo busi in imagin more than fred told him.“have you ani difficulti about doctrin—about the articl?” hesaid, try hard to think of the question simpli for fred’s sake.“no; i suppos the articl ar right. i am not prepar with anyargu to disprov them, and much better, clever fellow than i amgo in for them entir. i think it would be rather ridicul in me tourg scrupl of that sort, as if i were a judg,” said fred, quitesimpli.“i suppos, then, it ha occur to you that you might be a fairparish priest without be much of a divin?”“of cours, if i am oblig to be a clergyman, i shall try and do myduti, though i mayn’t like it. do you think ani bodi ought to blamem?”“for go into the church under the circumst? that depend onyour conscienc, fred—how far you have count the cost, and seen whatyour posit will requir of you. i can onli tell you about myself,that i have alwai been too lax, and have been uneasi in consequ.”“but there is anoth hindranc,” said fred, color. “i did not tellyou befor, though perhap i mai have said thing that made you guessit. there is somebodi i am veri fond of: i have love her ever sinc wewer children.”“miss garth, i suppos?” said the vicar, examin some label veryclos.“ye. i shouldn’t mind anyth if she would have me. and i know icould be a good fellow then.”“and you think she return the feel?”“she never will sai so; and a good while ago she made me promis not tospeak to her about it again. and she ha set her mind especiallyagainst my be a clergyman; i know that. but i can’t give her up. ido think she care about me. i saw mr. garth last night, and she saidthat mari wa stai at lowick rectori with miss farebroth.”“ye, she is veri kindli help my sister. do you wish to go there?”“no, i want to ask a great favor of you. i am asham to bother you inthi wai; but mari might listen to what you said, if you mention thesubject to her—i mean about my go into the church.”“that is rather a delic task, my dear fred. i shall have topresuppos your attach to her; and to enter on the subject as youwish me to do, will be ask her to tell me whether she return it.”“that is what i want her to tell you,” said fred, bluntli. “i don’tknow what to do, unless i can get at her feel.”“you mean that you would be guid by that as to your go into thechurch?”“if mari said she would never have me i might as well go wrong in onewai as anoth.”“that is nonsens, fred. men outliv their love, but thei don’t outliveth consequ of their reckless.”“not my sort of love: i have never been without love mari. if i hadto give her up, it would be like begin to live on wooden leg.”“will she not be hurt at my intrus?”“no, i feel sure she will not. she respect you more than ani on, andsh would not put you off with fun as she doe me. of cours i couldnot have told ani on els, or ask ani on els to speak to her, butyou. there is no on els who could be such a friend to both of us.”fred paus a moment, and then said, rather complainingli, “and sheought to acknowledg that i have work in order to pass. she ought tobeliev that i would exert myself for her sake.”there wa a moment’s silenc befor mr. farebroth laid down hi work,and put out hi hand to fred said—“veri well, my boi. i will do what you wish.”that veri dai mr. farebroth went to lowick parsonag on the nag whichh had just set up. “decidedli i am an old stalk,” he thought, “theyoung growth ar push me asid.”he found mari in the garden gather rose and sprinkl the petalson a sheet. the sun wa low, and tall tree sent their shadow acrossth grassi walk where mari wa move without bonnet or parasol. shedid not observ mr. farebroth’s approach along the grass, and hadjust stoop down to lectur a small black-and-tan terrier, which wouldpersist in walk on the sheet and smell at the rose-leav as marysprinkl them. she took hi fore-paw in on hand, and lift up theforefing of the other, while the dog wrinkl hi brow and lookedembarrass. “fly, fly, i am asham of you,” mari wa sai in agrav contralto. “thi is not becom in a sensibl dog; anybodi wouldthink you were a silli young gentleman.”“you ar unmerci to young gentlemen, miss garth,” said the vicar,within two yard of her.mari start up and blush. “it alwai answer to reason with fly,”she said, laughingli.“but not with young gentlemen?”“oh, with some, i suppos; sinc some of them turn into excel men.”“i am glad of that admiss, becaus i want at thi veri moment tointerest you in a young gentleman.”“not a silli on, i hope,” said mari, begin to pluck the rosesagain, and feel her heart beat uncomfort.“no; though perhap wisdom is not hi strong point, but ratheraffect and sincer. howev, wisdom li more in those twoqual than peopl ar apt to imagin. i hope you know by thosemark what young gentleman i mean.”“ye, i think i do,” said mari, brave, her face get more seriou,and her hand cold; “it must be fred vinci.”“he ha ask me to consult you about hi go into the church. i hopey will not think that i consent to take a liberti in promis todo so.”“on the contrari, mr. farebroth,” said mari, give up the rose, andfold her arm, but unabl to look up, “whenev you have anyth tosai to me i feel honor.”“but befor i enter on that question, let me just touch a point onwhich your father took me into confid; by the wai, it wa that veryeven on which i onc befor fulfil a mission from fred, justaft he had gone to colleg. mr. garth told me what happen on thenight of featherston’s death—how you refus to burn the will; and hesaid that you had some heart-prick on that subject, becaus you hadbeen the innoc mean of hinder fred from get hi ten thousandpound. i have kept that in mind, and i have heard someth that mayreliev you on that score—mai show you that no sin-offer is demandedfrom you there.”mr. farebroth paus a moment and look at mari. he meant to givefr hi full advantag, but it would be well, he thought, to clear hermind of ani superstit, such as women sometim follow when thei doa man the wrong of marri him as an act of aton. mari’s cheekshad begun to burn a littl, and she wa mute.“i mean, that your action made no real differ to fred’s lot. i findthat the first will would not have been legal good after the burningof the last; it would not have stood if it had been disput, and youmai be sure it would have been disput. so, on that score, you mayfeel your mind free.”“thank you, mr. farebroth,” said mari, earnestli. “i am grate toyou for rememb my feel.”“well, now i mai go on. fred, you know, ha taken hi degre. he haswork hi wai so far, and now the question is, what is he to do? thatquest is so difficult that he is inclin to follow hi father’swish and enter the church, though you know better than i do that hewa quit set against that formerli. i have question him on thesubject, and i confess i see no insuper object to hi be aclergyman, as thing go. he sai that he could turn hi mind to doinghi best in that vocat, on on condit. if that condit werefulfil i would do my utmost in help fred on. after a time—not, ofcours, at first—he might be with me as my curat, and he would have somuch to do that hi stipend would be nearli what i us to get asvicar. but i repeat that there is a condit without which all thisgood cannot come to pass. he ha open hi heart to me, miss garth,and ask me to plead for him. the condit li entir in yourfeel.”mari look so much move, that he said after a moment, “let us walk alittl;” and when thei were walk he ad, “to speak quit plainli,fred will not take ani cours which would lessen the chanc that youwould consent to be hi wife; but with that prospect, he will try hisbest at anyth you approv.”“i cannot possibl sai that i will ever be hi wife, mr. farebroth:but i certainli never will be hi wife if he becom a clergyman. whatyou sai is most gener and kind; i don’t mean for a moment to correctyour judgment. it is onli that i have my girlish, mock wai oflook at thing,” said mari, with a return sparkl of playfulnessin her answer which onli made it modesti more charm.“he wish me to report exactli what you think,” said mr. farebroth.“i could not love a man who is ridicul,” said mari, not choos togo deeper. “fred ha sens and knowledg enough to make himrespect, if he like, in some good worldli busi, but i cannev imagin him preach and exhort, and pronounc bless,and prai by the sick, without feel as if i were look at acaricatur. hi be a clergyman would be onli for gentil’s sake,and i think there is noth more contempt than such imbecilegentil. i us to think that of mr. crows, with hi empti face andneat umbrella, and minc littl speech. what right have such men torepres christian—as if it were an institut for get upidiot genteelli—as if—” mari check herself. she had been carriedalong as if she had been speak to fred instead of mr. farebroth.“young women ar sever: thei don’t feel the stress of action as mendo, though perhap i ought to make you an except there. but youdon’t put fred vinci on so low a level as that?”“no, inde, he ha plenti of sens, but i think he would not show ita a clergyman. he would be a piec of profession affect.”“then the answer is quit decid. as a clergyman he could have nohop?”mari shook her head.“but if he brave all the difficulti of get hi bread in someoth wai—will you give him the support of hope? mai he count onwin you?”“i think fred ought not to need tell again what i have alreadi saidto him,” mari answer, with a slight resent in her manner. “i meanthat he ought not to put such question until he ha done somethingworthi, instead of sai that he could do it.”mr. farebroth wa silent for a minut or more, and then, as theyturn and paus under the shadow of a mapl at the end of a grassywalk, said, “i understand that you resist ani attempt to fetter you,but either your feel for fred vinci exclud your entertaininganoth attach, or it doe not: either he mai count on yourremain singl until he shall have earn your hand, or he mai in anycas be disappoint. pardon me, mari—you know i us to catechis youunder that name—but when the state of a woman’s affect touch thehappi of anoth life—of more live than on—i think it would beth nobler cours for her to be perfectli direct and open.”mari in her turn wa silent, wonder not at mr. farebroth’s mannerbut at hi tone, which had a grave restrain emot in it. when thestrang idea flash across her that hi word had refer tohimself, she wa incredul, and asham of entertain it. she hadnev thought that ani man could love her except fred, who had espousedh with the umbrella ring, when she wore sock and littl strappedsho; still less that she could be of ani import to mr.farebroth, the cleverest man in her narrow circl. she had onli timeto feel that all thi wa hazi and perhap illusori; but on thing wasclear and determin—her answer.“sinc you think it my duti, mr. farebroth, i will tell you that ihav too strong a feel for fred to give him up for ani on els. ishould never be quit happi if i thought he wa unhappi for the loss ofm. it ha taken such deep root in me—my gratitud to him for alwayslov me best, and mind so much if i hurt myself, from the timewhen we were veri littl. i cannot imagin ani new feel come tomak that weaker. i should like better than anyth to see him worthyof everi on’s respect. but pleas tell him i will not promis to marryhim till then: i should shame and griev my father and mother. he isfre to choos some on els.”“then i have fulfil my commiss thoroughli,” said mr. farebroth,put out hi hand to mari, “and i shall ride back to middlemarchforthwith. with thi prospect befor him, we shall get fred into theright nich somehow, and i hope i shall live to join your hand. godbless you!”“oh, pleas stai, and let me give you some tea,” said mari. her eyesfil with tear, for someth indefin, someth like theresolut suppress of a pain in mr. farebroth’s manner, made herfeel suddenli miser, as she had onc felt when she saw her father’shand trembl in a moment of troubl.“no, my dear, no. i must get back.”in three minut the vicar wa on horseback again, have gonemagnanim through a duti much harder than the renunci ofwhist, or even than the write of penitenti medit.chapter liii.it is but a shallow hast which concludeth insincer from whatoutsid call inconsist—put a dead mechan of “if” and“therefor” for the live myriad of hidden sucker wherebi the beliefand the conduct ar wrought into mutual sustain.mr. bulstrod, when he wa hope to acquir a new interest in lowick,had natur had an especi wish that the new clergyman should be onewhom he thoroughli approv; and he believ it to be a chastisementand admonit direct to hi own shortcom and those of the nationat larg, that just about the time when he came in possess of thede which made him the proprietor of stone court, mr. farebroth“read himself” into the quaint littl church and preach hi firstsermon to the congreg of farmer, labor, and villag artisan.it wa not that mr. bulstrod intend to frequent lowick church or toresid at stone court for a good while to come: he had bought theexcel farm and fine homestead simpli as a retreat which he mightgradu enlarg as to the land and beautifi as to the dwell, untilit should be conduc to the divin glori that he should enter on ita a resid, partial withdraw from hi present exert in theadministr of busi, and throw more conspicu on the sideof gospel truth the weight of local land proprietorship, whichprovid might increas by unforeseen occas of purchas. a stronglead in thi direct seem to have been given in the surprisingfacil of get stone court, when everi on had expect that mr.rigg featherston would have clung to it as the garden of eden. thatwa what poor old peter himself had expect; have often, inimagin, look up through the sod abov him, and, unobstruct byperspect, seen hi frog-face legate enjoi the fine old place toth perpetu surpris and disappoint of other survivor.but how littl we know what would make paradis for our neighbor! wejudg from our own desir, and our neighbor themselv ar not alwaysopen enough even to throw out a hint of their. the cool and judiciousjoshua rigg had not allow hi parent to perceiv that stone court wasanyth less than the chief good in hi estim, and he hadcertainli wish to call it hi own. but as warren hast look atgold and thought of bui daylesford, so joshua rigg look at stonecourt and thought of bui gold. he had a veri distinct and intensevis of hi chief good, the vigor greed which he had inheritedhav taken a special form by dint of circumst: and hi chief goodwa to be a moneychang. from hi earliest employ as an errand-boyin a seaport, he had look through the window of the moneychang asoth boi look through the window of the pastri-cook; thefascin had wrought itself gradual into a deep special passion;he meant, when he had properti, to do mani thing, on of them be tomarri a genteel young person; but these were all accid and joysthat imagin could dispens with. the on joi after which hi soulthirst wa to have a monei-changer’s shop on a much-frequent quai,to have lock all round him of which he held the kei, and to looksublim cool as he handl the breed coin of all nation, whilehelpless cupid look at him envious from the other side of aniron lattic. the strength of that passion had been a power enablinghim to master all the knowledg necessari to gratifi it. and whenoth were think that he had settl at stone court for life,joshua himself wa think that the moment now wa not far off when heshould settl on the north quai with the best appoint in safe andlock.enough. we ar concern with look at joshua rigg’s sale of hi landfrom mr. bulstrod’s point of view, and he interpret it as a cheeringdispens convei perhap a sanction to a purpos which he had forsom time entertain without extern encourag; he interpret itthu, but not too confid, offer up hi thanksgiv in guardedphraseolog. hi doubt did not aris from the possibl relat ofth event to joshua rigg’s destini, which belong to the unmappedregion not taken under the providenti govern, except perhap inan imperfect coloni wai; but thei aros from reflect that thisdispens too might be a chastis for himself, as mr.farebroth’s induct to the live clearli wa.thi wa not what mr. bulstrod said to ani man for the sake ofdeceiv him: it wa what he said to himself—it wa as genuin hismod of explain event as ani theori of your mai be, if you happento disagre with him. for the egoism which enter into our theoriesdo not affect their sincer; rather, the more our egoism issatisfi, the more robust is our belief.howev, whether for sanction or for chastis, mr. bulstrod,hardli fifteen month after the death of peter featherston, had becometh proprietor of stone court, and what peter would sai “if he wereworthi to know,” had becom an inexhaust and consolatori subject ofconvers to hi disappoint rel. the tabl were now turnedon that dear brother depart, and to contempl the frustrat ofhi cun by the superior cun of thing in gener wa a cud ofdelight to solomon. mr. waul had a melancholi triumph in the proofthat it did not answer to make fals featherston and cut off thegenuin; and sister martha receiv the new in the chalki flat said,“dear, dear! then the almighti could have been none so pleas with thealmshous after all.”affection mr. bulstrod wa particularli glad of the advantagewhich her husband’s health wa like to get from the purchas of stonecourt. few dai pass without hi ride thither and look over somepart of the farm with the bailiff, and the even were delici inthat quiet spot, when the new hai-rick late set up were sendingforth odor to mingl with the breath of the rich old garden. oneeven, while the sun wa still abov the horizon and burn ingolden lamp among the great walnut bough, mr. bulstrod wa pausingon horseback outsid the front gate wait for caleb garth, who hadmet him by appoint to give an opinion on a question of stabledrainag, and wa now advis the bailiff in the rick-yard.mr. bulstrod wa consciou of be in a good spiritu frame and morethan usual seren, under the influenc of hi innoc recreat. hewa doctrin convinc that there wa a total absenc of merit inhimself; but that doctrin convict mai be held without pain whenth sens of demerit doe not take a distinct shape in memori andrev the tingl of shame or the pang of remors. nai, it mai beheld with intens satisfact when the depth of our sin is but ameasur for the depth of forgiv, and a clench proof that we arepeculiar instrument of the divin intent. the memori ha as manymood as the temper, and shift it sceneri like a diorama. at thismoment mr. bulstrod felt as if the sunshin were all on with that offar-off even when he wa a veri young man and us to go outpreach beyond highburi. and he would willingli have had that serviceof exhort in prospect now. the text were there still, and so washi own facil in expound them. hi brief reveri wa interruptedbi the return of caleb garth, who also wa on horseback, and wa justshak hi bridl befor start, when he exclaim—“bless my heart! what’s thi fellow in black come along the lane?he’s like on of those men on see about after the race.”mr. bulstrod turn hi hors and look along the lane, but made norepli. the comer wa our slight acquaint mr. raffl, whoseappear present no other chang than such as wa due to a suit ofblack and a crape hat-band. he wa within three yard of the horsemannow, and thei could see the flash of recognit in hi face as hewhirl hi stick upward, look all the while at mr. bulstrod, andat last exclaim:—“by jove, nick, it’s you! i couldn’t be mistaken, though thefiv-and-twenti year have plai old bogui with us both! how ar you,eh? you didn’t expect to see _me_ here. come, shake us by the hand.” tosai that mr. raffl’ manner wa rather excit would be onli on modeof sai that it wa even. caleb garth could see that there wa amoment of struggl and hesit in mr. bulstrod, but it end in hisput out hi hand coldli to raffl and sai—“i did not inde expect to see you in thi remot countri place.”“well, it belong to a stepson of mine,” said raffl, adjustinghimself in a swagger attitud. “i came to see him here befor. i’mnot so surpris at see you, old fellow, becaus i pick up alett—what you mai call a providenti thing. it’s uncommonlyfortun i met you, though; for i don’t care about see my stepson:he’s not affection, and hi poor mother’s gone now. to tell thetruth, i came out of love to you, nick: i came to get your address,for—look here!” raffl drew a crumpl paper from hi pocket.almost ani other man than caleb garth might have been tempt to lingeron the spot for the sake of hear all he could about a man whoseacquaint with bulstrod seem to impli passag in the banker’slife so unlik anyth that wa known of him in middlemarch that theymust have the natur of a secret to piqu curios. but caleb waspeculiar: certain human tendenc which ar commonli strong werealmost absent from hi mind; and on of these wa curios aboutperson affair. especi if there wa anyth discredit to befound out concern anoth man, caleb prefer not to know it; andif he had to tell anybodi under him that hi evil do werediscov, he wa more embarrass than the culprit. he now spurredhi hors, and sai, “i wish you good even, mr. bulstrod; i mustb get home,” set off at a trot.“you didn’t put your full address to thi letter,” raffl continu.“that wa not like the first-rate man of busi you us to be. ‘theshrub,’—thei mai be anywher: you live near at hand, eh?—have cut thelondon concern altogeth—perhap turn countri squir—have a ruralmans to invit me to. lord, how mani year it is ago! the old ladymust have been dead a pretti long while—gone to glori without the painof know how poor her daughter wa, eh? but, by jove! you’re verypal and pasti, nick. come, if you’re go home, i’ll walk by yoursid.”mr. bulstrod’s usual pale had in fact taken an almost deathli hue.five minut befor, the expans of hi life had been submerg in itseven sunshin which shone backward to it rememb morn: sinseem to be a question of doctrin and inward penit, humiliationan exercis of the closet, the bear of hi deed a matter of privatevis adjust sole by spiritu relat and concept of thedivin purpos. and now, as if by some hideou magic, thi loud redfigur had risen befor him in unmanag solid—an incorporatepast which had not enter into hi imagin of chastis. butmr. bulstrod’s thought wa busi, and he wa not a man to act or speakrashli.“i wa go home,” he said, “but i can defer my ride a littl. and youcan, if you pleas, rest here.”“thank you,” said raffl, make a grimac. “i don’t care now aboutse my stepson. i’d rather go home with you.”“your stepson, if mr. rigg featherston wa he, is here no longer. i ammast here now.”raffl open wide ey, and gave a long whistl of surpris, beforeh said, “well then, i’ve no object. i’ve had enough walk fromth coach-road. i never wa much of a walker, or rider either. what ilik is a smart vehicl and a spirit cob. i wa alwai a littl heavyin the saddl. what a pleasant surpris it must be to you to see me,old fellow!” he continu, as thei turn toward the hous. “you don’tsai so; but you never took your luck heartili—you were alwai thinkingof improv the occas—you’d such a gift for improv your luck.”mr. raffl seem greatli to enjoi hi own wit, and swung hi leg in aswagg manner which wa rather too much for hi companion’sjudici patienc.“if i rememb rightli,” mr. bulstrod observ, with chill anger, “ouracquaint mani year ago had not the sort of intimaci which you arenow assum, mr. raffl. ani servic you desir of me will be themor readili render if you will avoid a tone of familiar which didnot lie in our former intercours, and can hardli be warrant by morethan twenti year of separ.”“you don’t like be call nick? why, i alwai call you nick in myheart, and though lost to sight, to memori dear. by jove! my feelingshav ripen for you like fine old cognac. i hope you’ve got some inth hous now. josh fill my flask well the last time.”mr. bulstrod had not yet fulli learn that even the desir for cognacwa not stronger in raffl than the desir to torment, and that a hintof annoy alwai serv him as a fresh cue. but it wa at leastclear that further object wa useless, and mr. bulstrod, in givingord to the housekeep for the accommod of the guest, had aresolut air of quietud.there wa the comfort of think that thi housekeep had been in theservic of rigg also, and might accept the idea that mr. bulstrodeentertain raffl mere as a friend of her former master.when there wa food and drink spread befor hi visitor in thewainscot parlor, and no wit in the room, mr. bulstrod said—“your habit and mine ar so differ, mr. raffl, that we can hardlyenjoi each other’s societi. the wisest plan for both of us willtherefor be to part as soon as possibl. sinc you sai that you wishedto meet me, you probabl consid that you had some busi totransact with me. but under the circumst i will invit you toremain here for the night, and i will myself ride over here earlyto-morrow morn—befor breakfast, in fact—when i can receiv anycommun you have to make to me.”“with all my heart,” said raffl; “thi is a comfort place—alittl dull for a continu; but i can put up with it for a night,with thi good liquor and the prospect of see you again in themorn. you’re a much better host than my stepson wa; but josh owedm a bit of a grudg for marri hi mother; and between you and mether wa never anyth but kind.”mr. bulstrod, hope that the peculiar mixtur of jovial andsneer in raffl’ manner wa a good deal the effect of drink, haddetermin to wait till he wa quit sober befor he spent more wordsupon him. but he rode home with a terribl lucid vision of thedifficulti there would be in arrang ani result that could beperman count on with thi man. it wa inevit that he shouldwish to get rid of john raffl, though hi reappear could not beregard as ly outsid the divin plan. the spirit of evil mighthav sent him to threaten mr. bulstrod’s subvers as an instrumentof good; but the threat must have been permit, and wa achastis of a new kind. it wa an hour of anguish for him verydiffer from the hour in which hi struggl had been securelypriv, and which had end with a sens that hi secret misde werepardon and hi servic accept. those misde even whencommit—had thei not been half sanctifi by the singl of hisdesir to devot himself and all he possess to the further of thedivin scheme? and wa he after all to becom a mere stone of stumblingand a rock of offenc? for who would understand the work within him?who would not, when there wa the pretext of cast disgrac upon him,confound hi whole life and the truth he had espous, in on heap ofobloqui?in hi closest medit the life-long habit of mr. bulstrod’s mindclad hi most egoist terror in doctrin refer to superhumanend. but even while we ar talk and medit about the earth’sorbit and the solar system, what we feel and adjust our movement to isth stabl earth and the chang dai. and now within all the automaticsuccess of theoret phrase—distinct and inmost as the shiver andth ach of oncom fever when we ar discuss abstract pain, wasth forecast of disgrac in the presenc of hi neighbor and of hisown wife. for the pain, as well as the public estim of disgrac,depend on the amount of previou profess. to men who onli aim atescap feloni, noth short of the prison’s dock is disgrac. butmr. bulstrod had aim at be an emin christian.it wa not more than half-past seven in the morn when he againreach stone court. the fine old place never look more like adelight home than at that moment; the great white lili were inflow, the nasturtium, their pretti leav all silver with dew,were run awai over the low stone wall; the veri nois all aroundhad a heart of peac within them. but everyth wa spoil for theowner as he walk on the gravel in front and await the descent ofmr. raffl, with whom he wa condemn to breakfast.it wa not long befor thei were seat togeth in the wainscotedparlor over their tea and toast, which wa as much as raffl care totak at that earli hour. the differ between hi morn and eveningself wa not so great as hi companion had imagin that it might be;the delight in torment wa perhap even the stronger becaus hisspirit were rather less highli pitch. certainli hi manner seemedmor disagre by the morn light.“as i have littl time to spare, mr. raffl,” said the banker, whocould hardli do more than sip hi tea and break hi toast without it, “i shall be oblig if you will mention at onc the groundon which you wish to meet with me. i presum that you have a homeelsewher and will be glad to return to it.”“why, if a man ha got ani heart, doesn’t he want to see an old friend,nick?—i must call you nick—we alwai did call you young nick when weknew you meant to marri the old widow. some said you had a handsomefamili like to old nick, but that wa your mother’s fault, callingy nichola. aren’t you glad to see me again? i expect an invit tostai with you at some pretti place. my own establish is broken upnow my wife’s dead. i’ve no particular attach to ani spot; i woulda soon settl hereabout as anywher.”“mai i ask why you return from america? i consid that the strongwish you express to go there, when an adequ sum wa furnish, wastantamount to an engag that you would remain there for life.”“never knew that a wish to go to a place wa the same thing as a wishto stai. but i did stai a matter of ten year; it didn’t suit me tostai ani longer. and i’m not go again, nick.” here mr. raffleswink slowli as he look at mr. bulstrod.“do you wish to be settl in ani busi? what is your call now?”“thank you, my call is to enjoi myself as much as i can. i don’tcare about work ani more. if i did anyth it would be a littletravel in the tobacco line—or someth of that sort, which take aman into agreeabl compani. but not without an independ to fallback upon. that’s what i want: i’m not so strong as i wa, nick, thoughi’ve got more color than you. i want an independ.”“that could be suppli to you, if you would engag to keep at adist,” said mr. bulstrod, perhap with a littl too much eagernessin hi underton.“that must be as it suit my conveni,” said raffl coolli. “i seeno reason why i shouldn’t make a few acquaint hereabout. i’m notasham of myself as compani for anybodi. i drop my portmanteau atth turnpik when i got down—chang of linen—genuin—honor bright—morethan front and wristband; and with thi suit of mourn, strap andeveryth, i should do you credit among the nob here.” mr. raffleshad push awai hi chair and look down at himself, particularli athi strap. hi chief intent wa to annoi bulstrod, but he reallythought that hi appear now would produc a good effect, and thath wa not onli handsom and witti, but clad in a mourn style whichimpli solid connect.“if you intend to reli on me in ani wai, mr. raffl,” said bulstrod,after a moment’s paus, “you will expect to meet my wish.”“ah, to be sure,” said raffl, with a mock cordial. “didn’t ialwai do it? lord, you made a pretti thing out of me, and i got butlittl. i’ve often thought sinc, i might have done better by tellingth old woman that i’d found her daughter and her grandchild: it wouldhav suit my feel better; i’ve got a soft place in my heart. butyou’ve buri the old ladi by thi time, i suppos—it’s all on to hernow. and you’ve got your fortun out of that profit busi whichhad such a bless on it. you’ve taken to be a nob, bui land,be a countri bashaw. still in the dissent line, eh? still godli?or taken to the church as more genteel?”thi time mr. raffl’ slow wink and slight protrus of hi tonguewa wors than a nightmar, becaus it held the certitud that it wasnot a nightmar, but a wake miseri. mr. bulstrod felt a shudderingnausea, and did not speak, but wa consid dilig whether heshould not leav raffl to do as he would, and simpli defi him as aslander. the man would soon show himself disreput enough to makepeopl disbeliev him. “but not when he tell ani ugli-look truthabout _you_,” said discern conscious. and again: it seem nowrong to keep raffl at a distanc, but mr. bulstrod shrank from thedirect falsehood of deni true statement. it wa on thing to lookback on forgiven sin, nai, to explain question conform to laxcustom, and anoth to enter deliber on the necess offalsehood.but sinc bulstrod did not speak, raffl ran on, by wai of us timeto the utmost.“i’ve not had such fine luck as you, by jove! thing went confoundedlywith me in new york; those yanke ar cool hand, and a man ofgentlemanli feel ha no chanc with them. i marri when i cameback—a nice woman in the tobacco trade—veri fond of me—but the tradewa restrict, as we sai. she had been settl there a good mani yearsbi a friend; but there wa a son too much in the case. josh and i neverhit it off. howev, i made the most of the posit, and i’ve alwaystaken my glass in good compani. it’s been all on the squar with me;i’m as open as the dai. you won’t take it ill of me that i didn’t lookyou up befor. i’ve got a complaint that make me a littl dilatori. ithought you were trade and prai awai in london still, and didn’tfind you there. but you see i wa sent to you, nick—perhap for abless to both of us.”mr. raffl end with a jocos snuffl: no man felt hi intellect moresuperior to religi cant. and if the cun which calcul on themeanest feel in men could be call intellect, he had hi share,for under the blurt ralli tone with which he spoke to bulstrod,there wa an evid select of statement, as if thei had been somani move at chess. meanwhil bulstrod had determin on hi move,and he said, with gather resolut—“you will do well to reflect, mr. raffl, that it is possibl for aman to overreach himself in the effort to secur undu advantag.although i am not in ani wai bound to you, i am will to suppli youwith a regular annuiti—in quarterli payment—so long as you fulfil apromis to remain at a distanc from thi neighborhood. it is in yourpow to choos. if you insist on remain here, even for a shorttim, you will get noth from me. i shall declin to know you.”“ha, ha!” said raffl, with an affect explos, “that remind me ofa droll dog of a thief who declin to know the constabl.”“your allus ar lost on me sir,” said bulstrod, with white heat;“the law ha no hold on me either through your agenc or ani other.”“you can’t understand a joke, my good fellow. i onli meant that ishould never declin to know you. but let us be seriou. your quarterlypay won’t quit suit me. i like my freedom.”here raffl rose and stalk onc or twice up and down the room,swing hi leg, and assum an air of masterli medit. at lasth stop opposit bulstrod, and said, “i’ll tell you what! give us acoupl of hundr—come, that’s modest—and i’ll go awai—honorbright!—pick up my portmanteau and go awai. but i shall not give up myliberti for a dirti annuiti. i shall come and go where i like. perhapsit mai suit me to stai awai, and correspond with a friend; perhap not.have you the monei with you?”“no, i have on hundr,” said bulstrod, feel the immediateridd too great a relief to be reject on the ground of futureuncertainti. “i will forward you the other if you will mention anaddress.”“no, i’ll wait here till you bring it,” said raffl. “i’ll take astrol and have a snack, and you’ll be back by that time.”mr. bulstrod’s sickli bodi, shatter by the agit he had gonethrough sinc the last even, made him feel abjectli in the power ofthi loud invulner man. at that moment he snatch at a temporaryrepos to be won on ani term. he wa rise to do what rafflessuggest, when the latter said, lift up hi finger as if with asudden recollect—“i did have anoth look after sarah again, though i didn’t tell you;i’d a tender conscienc about that pretti young woman. i didn’t findher, but i found out her husband’s name, and i made a note of it. buthang it, i lost my pocketbook. howev, if i heard it, i should know itagain. i’ve got my faculti as if i wa in my prime, but name wearout, by jove! sometim i’m no better than a confound tax-paperbefor the name ar fill in. howev, if i hear of her and herfamili, you shall know, nick. you’d like to do someth for her, nowsh’s your step-daughter.”“doubtless,” said mr. bulstrod, with the usual steadi look of hislight-grai ey; “though that might reduc my power of assist you.”as he walk out of the room, raffl wink slowli at hi back, andthen turn toward the window to watch the banker ridingawai—virtual at hi command. hi lip first curl with a smile andthen open with a short triumphant laugh.“but what the deuc wa the name?” he present said, half aloud,scratch hi head, and wrinkl hi brow horizont. he had notreal care or thought about thi point of forget until itoccur to him in hi invent of annoy for bulstrod.“it began with l; it wa almost all l’s i fanci,” he went on, with asens that he wa get hold of the slipperi name. but the hold wastoo slight, and he soon got tire of thi mental chase; for few menwer more impati of privat occup or more in need of makingthemselv continu heard than mr. raffl. he prefer us histim in pleasant convers with the bailiff and the housekeep,from whom he gather as much as he want to know about mr.bulstrod’s posit in middlemarch.after all, howev, there wa a dull space of time which neededreliev with bread and chees and al, and when he wa seat alonewith these resourc in the wainscot parlor, he suddenli slap hiskne, and exclaim, “ladislaw!” that action of memori which he hadtri to set go, and had abandon in despair, had suddenlycomplet itself without consciou effort—a common experi,agreeabl as a complet sneez, even if the name rememb is of novalu. raffl immedi took out hi pocket-book, and wrote down thenam, not becaus he expect to us it, but mere for the sake of notb at a loss if he ever did happen to want it. he wa not go totel bulstrod: there wa no actual good in tell, and to a mind likethat of mr. raffl there is alwai probabl good in a secret.he wa satisfi with hi present success, and by three o’clock thatdai he had taken up hi portmanteau at the turnpik and mount thecoach, reliev mr. bulstrod’s ey of an ugli black spot on thelandscap at stone court, but not reliev him of the dread that theblack spot might reappear and becom insepar even from the visionof hi hearth.book vi.the widow and the wife.chapter liv.“negli occhi porta la mia donna amor;per che si fa gentil ciò ch’ella mira:ov’ella passa, ogni uom ver lei si gira,e cui saluta fa tremar lo core.sicchè, bassando il viso, tutto smore,e d’ogni suo difetto allor sospira:fuggon dinanzi a lei superbia ed ira:aiutatemi, donn, a farl onor.ogni dolcezza, ogni pensiero umilenasc nel core a chi parlar la sent;ond’è beato chi prima la vide.quel ch’ella par quand’ un poco sorrid,non si può dicer, nè tener a ment,si è nuovo miracolo gentil.”—dant: _la vita nuova_.by that delight morn when the hai-rick at stone court weresc the air quit imparti, as if mr. raffl had been a guestworthi of finest incens, dorothea had again taken up her abod atlowick manor. after three month freshitt had becom rather oppress:to sit like a model for saint catherin look raptur at celia’sbabi would not do for mani hour in the dai, and to remain in thatmoment babe’s presenc with persist disregard wa a cours thatcould not have been toler in a childless sister. dorothea wouldhav been capabl of carri babi joyfulli for a mile if there hadbeen need, and of love it the more tenderli for that labor; but to anaunt who doe not recogn her infant nephew as bouddha, and hasnoth to do for him but to admir, hi behavior is apt to appearmonoton, and the interest of watch him exhaust. thisposs wa quit hidden from celia, who felt that dorothea’schildless widowhood fell in quit prettili with the birth of littlearthur (babi wa name after mr. brook).“dodo is just the creatur not to mind about have anyth of herown—children or anyth!” said celia to her husband. “and if she hadhad a babi, it never could have been such a dear as arthur. could it,jame?“not if it had been like casaubon,” said sir jame, consciou of someindirect in hi answer, and of hold a strictli privat opiniona to the perfect of hi first-born.“no! just imagin! realli it wa a merci,” said celia; “and i think iti veri nice for dodo to be a widow. she can be just as fond of ourbabi as if it were her own, and she can have as mani notion of her owna she like.”“it is a piti she wa not a queen,” said the devout sir jame.“but what should we have been then? we must have been someth els,”said celia, object to so labori a flight of imagin. “i likeh better as she is.”henc, when she found that dorothea wa make arrang for herfin departur to lowick, celia rais her eyebrow withdisappoint, and in her quiet unemphat wai shot a needl-arrow ofsarcasm.“what will you do at lowick, dodo? you sai yourself there is noth tobe done there: everybodi is so clean and well off, it make you quitemelancholi. and here you have been so happi go all about tipton withmr. garth into the worst backyard. and now uncl is abroad, you andmr. garth can have it all your own wai; and i am sure jame doeseveryth you tell him.”“i shall often come here, and i shall see how babi grow all thebett,” said dorothea.“but you will never see him wash,” said celia; “and that is quit thebest part of the dai.” she wa almost pout: it did seem to her veryhard in dodo to go awai from the babi when she might stai.“dear kitti, i will come and stai all night on purpos,” said dorothea;“but i want to be alon now, and in my own home. i wish to know thefarebroth better, and to talk to mr. farebroth about what there isto be done in middlemarch.”dorothea’s nativ strength of will wa no longer all convert intoresolut submiss. she had a great yearn to be at lowick, and wassimpli determin to go, not feel bound to tell all her reason. buteveri on around her disapprov. sir jame wa much pain, andoff that thei should all migrat to cheltenham for a few monthswith the sacr ark, otherwis call a cradl: at that period a mancould hardli know what to propos if cheltenham were reject.the dowag ladi chettam, just return from a visit to her daughter intown, wish, at least, that mr. vigo should be written to, andinvit to accept the offic of companion to mr. casaubon: it wa notcred that dorothea as a young widow would think of live alon inth hous at lowick. mr. vigo had been reader and secretari to royalpersonag, and in point of knowledg and sentiment even dorotheacould have noth to object to her.mr. cadwallad said, privat, “you will certainli go mad in thathous alon, my dear. you will see vision. we have all got to exertourselv a littl to keep sane, and call thing by the same name asoth peopl call them by. to be sure, for younger son and women whohav no monei, it is a sort of provis to go mad: thei ar taken careof then. but you must not run into that. i dare sai you ar a littlebor here with our good dowag; but think what a bore you mightbecom yourself to your fellow-creatur if you were alwai playingtragedi queen and take thing sublim. sit alon in thatlibrari at lowick you mai fanci yourself rule the weather; you mustget a few peopl round you who wouldn’t believ you if you told them.that is a good lower medicin.”“i never call everyth by the same name that all the peopl aboutm did,” said dorothea, stoutli.“but i suppos you have found out your mistak, my dear,” said mr.cadwallad, “and that is a proof of saniti.”dorothea wa awar of the sting, but it did not hurt her. “no,” shesaid, “i still think that the greater part of the world is mistakenabout mani thing. sure on mai be sane and yet think so, sinc thegreat part of the world ha often had to come round from itsopinion.”mr. cadwallad said no more on that point to dorothea, but to herhusband she remark, “it will be well for her to marri again as soona it is proper, if on could get her among the right peopl. of courseth chettam would not wish it. but i see clearli a husband is the bestth to keep her in order. if we were not so poor i would invit lordtriton. he will be marqui some dai, and there is no deni that shewould make a good marchio: she look handsom than ever in hermourn.”“my dear elinor, do let the poor woman alon. such contriv ar ofno us,” said the easi rector.“no us? how ar match made, except by bring men and womentogeth? and it is a shame that her uncl should have run awai andshut up the grang just now. there ought to be plenti of eligiblematch invit to freshitt and the grang. lord triton is preciselyth man: full of plan for make the peopl happi in a soft-headedsort of wai. that would just suit mr. casaubon.”“let mr. casaubon choos for herself, elinor.”“that is the nonsens you wise men talk! how can she choos if she hasno varieti to choos from? a woman’s choic usual mean take theonli man she can get. mark my word, humphrei. if her friend don’texert themselv, there will be a wors busi than the casaubonbusi yet.”“for heaven’s sake don’t touch on that topic, elinor! it is a veri sorepoint with sir jame. he would be deepli offend if you enter on itto him unnecessarili.”“i have never enter on it,” said mr cadwallad, open her hand.“celia told me all about the will at the begin, without ani askingof mine.”“ye, ye; but thei want the thing hush up, and i understand that theyoung fellow is go out of the neighborhood.”mr. cadwallad said noth, but gave her husband three significantnod, with a veri sarcast express in her dark ey.dorothea quietli persist in spite of remonstr and persuas. sobi the end of june the shutter were all open at lowick manor, andth morn gaze calmli into the librari, shine on the row ofnot-book as it shine on the weari wast plant with huge stone,the mute memori of a forgotten faith; and the even laden withros enter silent into the blue-green boudoir where dorothea choseoftenest to sit. at first she walk into everi room, question theeighteen month of her marri life, and carri on her thought as ifthei were a speech to be heard by her husband. then, she linger inth librari and could not be at rest till she had carefulli rang allth note-book as she imagin that he would wish to see them, inorderli sequenc. the piti which had been the restrain compellingmot in her life with him still clung about hi imag, even while sheremonstr with him in indign thought and told him that he wasunjust. on littl act of her mai perhap be smile at assuperstiti. the synopt tabul for the us of mr. casaubon,she carefulli enclos and seal, write within the envelop, “icould not us it. do you not see now that i could not submit my soul toyour, by work hopelessli at what i have no belief in—dorothea?”then she deposit the paper in her own desk.that silent colloqui wa perhap onli the more earnest becauseunderneath and through it all there wa alwai the deep long whichhad realli determin her to come to lowick. the long wa to seewil ladislaw. she did not know ani good that could come of theirmeet: she wa helpless; her hand had been ti from make up tohim for ani unfair in hi lot. but her soul thirst to see him.how could it be otherwis? if a princess in the dai of enchant hadseen a four-foot creatur from among those which live in herd cometo her onc and again with a human gaze which rest upon her withchoic and beseech, what would she think of in her journei, whatwould she look for when the herd pass her? sure for the gaze whichhad found her, and which she would know again. life would be no betterthan candl-light tinsel and daylight rubbish if our spirit were nottouch by what ha been, to issu of long and constanc. it wastru that dorothea want to know the farebroth better, andespeci to talk to the new rector, but also true that rememberingwhat lydgat had told her about will ladislaw and littl miss nobl,she count on will’s come to lowick to see the farebroth famili.the veri first sundai, _befor_ she enter the church, she saw him assh had seen him the last time she wa there, alon in the clergyman’spew; but _when_ she enter hi figur wa gone.in the week-dai when she went to see the ladi at the rectori, shelisten in vain for some word that thei might let fall about will; butit seem to her that mr. farebroth talk of everi on els in theneighborhood and out of it.“probabl some of mr. farebroth’s middlemarch hearer mai follow himto lowick sometim. do you not think so?” said dorothea, ratherdespis herself for have a secret motiv in ask the question.“if thei ar wise thei will, mr. casaubon,” said the old ladi. “i seethat you set a right valu on my son’s preach. hi grandfath on mysid wa an excel clergyman, but hi father wa in the law:—mostexemplari and honest nevertheless, which is a reason for our neverb rich. thei sai fortun is a woman and caprici. but sometimessh is a good woman and give to those who merit, which ha been thecas with you, mr. casaubon, who have given a live to my son.”mr. farebroth recur to her knit with a dignifi satisfactionin her neat littl effort at oratori, but thi wa not what dorotheaw to hear. poor thing! she did not even know whether will ladislawwa still at middlemarch, and there wa no on whom she dare to ask,unless it were lydgat. but just now she could not see lydgat withoutsend for him or go to seek him. perhap will ladislaw, havingheard of that strang ban against him left by mr. casaubon, had felt itbett that he and she should not meet again, and perhap she wa wrongto wish for a meet that other might find mani good reason against.still “i do wish it” came at the end of those wise reflect asnatur as a sob after hold the breath. and the meet didhappen, but in a formal wai quit unexpect by her.on morn, about eleven, dorothea wa seat in her boudoir with amap of the land attach to the manor and other paper befor her,which were to help her in make an exact statement for herself of herincom and affair. she had not yet appli herself to her work, butwa seat with her hand fold on her lap, look out along theavenu of lime to the distant field. everi leaf wa at rest in thesunshin, the familiar scene wa changeless, and seem to representth prospect of her life, full of motiveless eas—motiveless, if herown energi could not seek out reason for ardent action. the widow’scap of those time made an oval frame for the face, and had a crownstand up; the dress wa an experi in the utmost lai on ofcrap; but thi heavi solemn of cloth made her face look all theyoung, with it recov bloom, and the sweet, inquir candor ofher ey.her reveri wa broken by tantripp, who came to sai that mr. ladislawwa below, and beg permiss to see madam if it were not too earli.“i will see him,” said dorothea, rise immedi. “let him be showninto the draw-room.”the draw-room wa the most neutral room in the hous to her—the oneleast associ with the trial of her marri life: the damaskmatch the wood-work, which wa all white and gold; there were twotal mirror and tabl with noth on them—in brief, it wa a roomwher you had no reason for sit in on place rather than inanoth. it wa below the boudoir, and had also a bow-window lookingout on the avenu. but when pratt show will ladislaw into it thewindow wa open; and a wing visitor, buzz in and out now and thenwithout mind the furnitur, made the room look less formal anduninhabit.“glad to see you here again, sir,” said pratt, linger to adjust ablind.“i am onli come to sai good-by, pratt,” said will, who wish even thebutl to know that he wa too proud to hang about mr. casaubon nowsh wa a rich widow.“veri sorri to hear it, sir,” said pratt, retir. of cours, as aserv who wa to be told noth, he knew the fact of which ladislawwa still ignor, and had drawn hi infer; inde, had notdiff from hi betroth tantripp when she said, “your master wa asjeal as a fiend—and no reason. madam would look higher than mr.ladislaw, els i don’t know her. mr. cadwallad’s maid sai there’s alord come who is to marri her when the mourn’s over.”there were not mani moment for will to walk about with hi hat in hishand befor dorothea enter. the meet wa veri differ from thatfirst meet in rome when will had been embarrass and dorothea calm.thi time he felt miser but determin, while she wa in a state ofagit which could not be hidden. just outsid the door she had feltthat thi long-for meet wa after all too difficult, and when shesaw will advanc toward her, the deep blush which wa rare in hercam with pain sudden. neither of them knew how it wa, butneith of them spoke. she gave her hand for a moment, and then theywent to sit down near the window, she on on sette and he on anotheropposit. will wa peculiarli uneasi: it seem to him not likedorothea that the mere fact of her be a widow should caus such achang in her manner of receiv him; and he knew of no othercondit which could have affect their previou relat to eachoth—except that, as hi imagin at onc told him, her friendsmight have been poison her mind with their suspicion of him.“i hope i have not presum too much in call,” said will; “i couldnot bear to leav the neighborhood and begin a new life without seeingyou to sai good-by.”“presum? sure not. i should have thought it unkind if you had notwish to see me,” said dorothea, her habit of speak with perfectgenuin assert itself through all her uncertainti and agit.“ar you go awai immedi?”“veri soon, i think. i intend to go to town and eat my dinner as abarrist, sinc, thei sai, that is the prepar for all publicbusi. there will be a great deal of polit work to be donebi-and-by, and i mean to try and do some of it. other men have managedto win an honor posit for themselv without famili or monei.”“and that will make it all the more honor,” said dorothea,ardent. “besid, you have so mani talent. i have heard from myuncl how well you speak in public, so that everi on is sorri when youleav off, and how clearli you can explain thing. and you care thatjustic should be done to everi on. i am so glad. when we were inrom, i thought you onli care for poetri and art, and the thing thatadorn life for us who ar well off. but now i know you think about therest of the world.”while she wa speak dorothea had lost her person embarrass,and had becom like her former self. she look at will with a directgl, full of delight confid.“you approv of my go awai for year, then, and never come hereagain till i have made myself of some mark in the world?” said will,try hard to reconcil the utmost pride with the utmost effort to getan express of strong feel from dorothea.she wa not awar how long it wa befor she answer. she had turnedh head and wa look out of the window on the rose-bush, whichseem to have in them the summer of all the year when will would beawai. thi wa not judici behavior. but dorothea never thought ofstudi her manner: she thought onli of bow to a sad necessitywhich divid her from will. those first word of hi about hisintent had seem to make everyth clear to her: he knew, shesuppos, all about mr. casaubon’s final conduct in relat to him,and it had come to him with the same sort of shock as to herself. hehad never felt more than friendship for her—had never had anyth inhi mind to justifi what she felt to be her husband’s outrag on thefeel of both: and that friendship he still felt. someth whichmai be call an inward silent sob had gone on in dorothea befor shesaid with a pure voic, just trembl in the last word as if onlyfrom it liquid flexibl—“ye, it must be right for you to do as you sai. i shall be veri happywhen i hear that you have made your valu felt. but you must havepati. it will perhap be a long while.”will never quit knew how it wa that he save himself from fallingdown at her feet, when the “long while” came forth with it gentletremor. he us to sai that the horribl hue and surfac of her crapedress wa most like the suffici control forc. he sat still,howev, and onli said—“i shall never hear from you. and you will forget all about me.”“no,” said dorothea, “i shall never forget you. i have never forgottenani on whom i onc knew. my life ha never been crowd, and seem notlik to be so. and i have a great deal of space for memori at lowick,haven’t i?” she smile.“good god!” will burst out passion, rise, with hi hat still inhi hand, and walk awai to a marbl tabl, where he suddenli turnedand lean hi back against it. the blood had mount to hi face andneck, and he look almost angri. it had seem to him as if thei werelik two creatur slowli turn to marbl in each other’s presenc,while their heart were consciou and their ey were yearn. butther wa no help for it. it should never be true of him that in thismeet to which he had come with bitter resolut he had end by aconfess which might be interpret into ask for her fortun.moreov, it wa actual true that he wa fear of the effect whichsuch confess might have on dorothea herself.she look at him from that distanc in some troubl, imagin thatther might have been an offenc in her word. but all the while therewa a current of thought in her about hi probabl want of monei, andth imposs of her help him. if her uncl had been at home,someth might have been done through him! it wa thi preoccupationwith the hardship of will’s want monei, while she had what ought tohav been hi share, which led her to sai, see that he remainedsil and look awai from her—“i wonder whether you would like to have that miniatur which hangsup-stair—i mean that beauti miniatur of your grandmoth. i thinkit is not right for me to keep it, if you would wish to have it. it iswonderfulli like you.”“you ar veri good,” said will, irrit. “no; i don’t mind about it.it is not veri consol to have on’s own like. it would be moreconsol if other want to have it.”“i thought you would like to cherish her memori—i thought—” dorotheabrok off an instant, her imagin suddenli warn her awai fromaunt julia’s histori—“you would sure like to have the miniatur as afamili memori.”“why should i have that, when i have noth els! a man with onli aportmanteau for hi stowag must keep hi memori in hi head.”will spoke at random: he wa mere vent hi petul; it wa alittl too exasper to have hi grandmoth’s portrait offer himat that moment. but to dorothea’s feel hi word had a peculiarst. she rose and said with a touch of indign as well ashauteur—“you ar much the happier of us two, mr. ladislaw, to have noth.”will wa startl. whatev the word might be, the tone seem like adismiss; and quit hi lean postur, he walk a littl waytoward her. their ey met, but with a strang question graviti.someth wa keep their mind aloof, and each wa left toconjectur what wa in the other. will had realli never thought ofhimself as have a claim of inherit on the properti which wa heldbi dorothea, and would have requir a narr to make him understandh present feel.“i never felt it a misfortun to have noth till now,” he said. “butpoverti mai be as bad as leprosi, if it divid us from what we mostcar for.”the word cut dorothea to the heart, and made her relent. she answeredin a tone of sad fellowship.“sorrow come in so mani wai. two year ago i had no notion of that—imean of the unexpect wai in which troubl come, and ti our hand,and make us silent when we long to speak. i us to despis women alittl for not shape their live more, and do better thing. i wasveri fond of do as i like, but i have almost given it up,” sheend, smile playfulli.“i have not given up do as i like, but i can veri seldom do it,”said will. he wa stand two yard from her with hi mind full ofcontradictori desir and resolv—desir some unmistak proofthat she love him, and yet dread the posit into which such aproof might bring him. “the thing on most long for mai be surroundedwith condit that would be intoler.”at thi moment pratt enter and said, “sir jame chettam is in thelibrari, madam.”“ask sir jame to come in here,” said dorothea, immedi. it wa asif the same electr shock had pass through her and will. each ofthem felt proudli resist, and neither look at the other, whilethei await sir jame’s entranc.after shake hand with dorothea, he bow as slightli as possibl toladislaw, who repaid the slight exactli, and then go towardsdorothea, said—“i must sai good-by, mr. casaubon; and probabl for a long while.”dorothea put out her hand and said her good-by cordial. the sensethat sir jame wa depreci will, and behav rude to him,rous her resolut and digniti: there wa no touch of confus inher manner. and when will had left the room, she look with such calmself-possess at sir jame, sai, “how is celia?” that he wasoblig to behav as if noth had annoi him. and what would be theus of behav otherwis? inde, sir jame shrank with so muchdislik from the associ even in thought of dorothea with ladislawa her possibl lover, that he would himself have wish to avoid anoutward show of displeasur which would have recogn thedisagre possibl. if ani on had ask him why he shrank inthat wai, i am not sure that he would at first have said anythingful or more precis than “_that_ ladislaw!”—though on reflect hemight have urg that mr. casaubon’s codicil, bar dorothea’smarriag with will, except under a penalti, wa enough to castunfit over ani relat at all between them. hi avers wa allth stronger becaus he felt himself unabl to interfer.but sir jame wa a power in a wai unguess by himself. enter atthat moment, he wa an incorpor of the strongest reason throughwhich will’s pride becam a repel forc, keep him asund fromdorothea.chapter lv.hath she her fault? i would you had them too.thei ar the fruiti must of soundest wine;or sai, thei ar regener firesuch as hath turn the dens black elementinto a crystal pathwai for the sun.if youth is the season of hope, it is often so onli in the sens thatour elder ar hope about us; for no ag is so apt as youth to thinkit emot, part, and resolv ar the last of their kind. eachcrisi seem final, simpli becaus it is new. we ar told that theoldest inhabit in peru do not ceas to be agit by theearthquak, but thei probabl see beyond each shock, and reflect thatther ar plenti more to come.to dorothea, still in that time of youth when the ey with their longful lash look out after their rain of tear unsoil and unwearieda a freshli open passion-flower, that morn’s part with willladislaw seem to be the close of their person relat. he wasgo awai into the distanc of unknown year, and if ever he came backh would be anoth man. the actual state of hi mind—hi proud resolveto give the lie beforehand to ani suspicion that he would plai theneedi adventur seek a rich woman—lai quit out of her imagin,and she had interpret all hi behavior easili enough by hersupposit that mr. casaubon’s codicil seem to him, as it did toher, a gross and cruel interdict on ani activ friendship between them.their young delight in speak to each other, and sai what no oneels would care to hear, wa forev end, and becom a treasur ofth past. for thi veri reason she dwelt on it without inward check.that uniqu happi too wa dead, and in it shadow silent chambersh might vent the passion grief which she herself wonder at. forth first time she took down the miniatur from the wall and kept itbefor her, like to blend the woman who had been too hardli judgedwith the grandson whom her own heart and judgment defend. can ani onewho ha rejoic in woman’s tender think it a reproach to her thatsh took the littl oval pictur in her palm and made a bed for itther, and lean her cheek upon it, as if that would sooth thecreatur who had suffer unjust condemn? she did not know thenthat it wa love who had come to her briefli, as in a dream beforeawak, with the hue of morn on hi wing—that it wa love to whomsh wa sob her farewel as hi imag wa banish by the blamelessrigor of irresist dai. she onli felt that there wa somethingirrevoc amiss and lost in her lot, and her thought about thefutur were the more readili shapen into resolv. ardent soul, readyto construct their come live, ar apt to commit themselv to thefulfil of their own vision.on dai that she went to freshitt to fulfil her promis of stai allnight and see babi wash, mr. cadwallad came to dine, the rectorb gone on a fish excurs. it wa a warm even, and even inth delight draw-room, where the fine old turf slope from theopen window toward a lili pool and well-plant mound, the heat wasenough to make celia in her white muslin and light curl reflect withpiti on what dodo must feel in her black dress and close cap. but thiswa not until some episod with babi were over, and had left her mindat leisur. she had seat herself and taken up a fan for some timebefor she said, in her quiet guttur—“dear dodo, do throw off that cap. i am sure your dress must make youfeel ill.”“i am so us to the cap—it ha becom a sort of shell,” said dorothea,smile. “i feel rather bare and expos when it is off.”“i must see you without it; it make us all warm,” said celia, throwingdown her fan, and go to dorothea. it wa a pretti pictur to seethi littl ladi in white muslin unfasten the widow’s cap from hermor majest sister, and toss it on to a chair. just as the coilsand braid of dark-brown hair had been set free, sir jame enter theroom. he look at the releas head, and said, “ah!” in a tone ofsatisfact.“it wa i who did it, jame,” said celia. “dodo need not make such aslaveri of her mourn; she need not wear that cap ani more among herfriend.”“my dear celia,” said ladi chettam, “a widow must wear her mourn atleast a year.”“not if she marri again befor the end of it,” said mr. cadwallad,who had some pleasur in startl her good friend the dowag. sirjam wa annoi, and lean forward to plai with celia’s maltes dog.“that is veri rare, i hope,” said ladi chettam, in a tone intend toguard against such event. “no friend of our ever commit herself inthat wai except mr. beevor, and it wa veri pain to lord grinsellwhen she did so. her first husband wa objection, which made it thegreat wonder. and sever she wa punish for it. thei said captainbeevor drag her about by the hair, and held up load pistol ather.”“oh, if she took the wrong man!” said mr. cadwallad, who wa in adecidedli wick mood. “marriag is alwai bad then, first or second.prioriti is a poor recommend in a husband if he ha got no other.i would rather have a good second husband than an indiffer first.”“my dear, your clever tongu run awai with you,” said ladi chettam. “iam sure you would be the last woman to marri again prematur, if ourdear rector were taken awai.”“oh, i make no vow; it might be a necessari economi. it is law tomarri again, i suppos; els we might as well be hindoo instead ofchristian. of cours if a woman accept the wrong man, she must taketh consequ, and on who doe it twice over deserv her fate. butif she can marri blood, beauti, and braveri—the sooner the better.”“i think the subject of our convers is veri ill-chosen,” said sirjam, with a look of disgust. “suppos we chang it.”“not on my account, sir jame,” said dorothea, determin not to loseth opportun of free herself from certain obliqu refer toexcel match. “if you ar speak on my behalf, i can assur youthat no question can be more indiffer and imperson to me thansecond marriag. it is no more to me than if you talk of women goingfox-hunt: whether it is admir in them or not, i shall not followthem. prai let mr. cadwallad amus herself on that subject as mucha on ani other.”“my dear mr. casaubon,” said ladi chettam, in her stateliest wai, “youdo not, i hope, think there wa ani allus to you in my mentioningmr. beevor. it wa onli an instanc that occur to me. she wasstep-daughter to lord grinsel: he marri mr. teveroi for hi secondwif. there could be no possibl allus to you.”“oh no,” said celia. “nobodi chose the subject; it all came out ofdodo’s cap. mr. cadwallad onli said what wa quit true. a womancould not be marri in a widow’s cap, jame.”“hush, my dear!” said mr. cadwallad. “i will not offend again. iwil not even refer to dido or zenobia. onli what ar we to talk about?i, for my part, object to the discuss of human natur, becaus thati the natur of rector’ wive.”later in the even, after mr. cadwallad wa gone, celia saidpriv to dorothea, “realli, dodo, take your cap off made you likeyourself again in more wai than on. you spoke up just as you us todo, when anyth wa said to displeas you. but i could hardli makeout whether it wa jame that you thought wrong, or mr. cadwallad.”“neither,” said dorothea. “jame spoke out of delicaci to me, but hewa mistaken in suppos that i mind what mr. cadwallad said. ishould onli mind if there were a law oblig me to take ani piec ofblood and beauti that she or anybodi els recommend.”“but you know, dodo, if you ever did marri, it would be all the betterto have blood and beauti,” said celia, reflect that mr. casaubon hadnot been richli endow with those gift, and that it would be well tocaut dorothea in time.“don’t be anxiou, kitti; i have quit other thought about my life. ishal never marri again,” said dorothea, touch her sister’s chin,and look at her with indulg affect. celia wa nurs herbabi, and dorothea had come to sai good-night to her.“realli—quit?” said celia. “not anybodi at all—if he were verywond inde?”dorothea shook her head slowli. “not anybodi at all. i have delightfulplan. i should like to take a great deal of land, and drain it, andmak a littl coloni, where everybodi should work, and all the workshould be done well. i should know everi on of the peopl and be theirfriend. i am go to have great consult with mr. garth: he cantel me almost everyth i want to know.”“then you _will_ be happi, if you have a plan, dodo?” said celia.“perhap littl arthur will like plan when he grow up, and then hecan help you.”sir jame wa inform that same night that dorothea wa realli quiteset against marri anybodi at all, and wa go to take to “allsort of plan,” just like what she us to have. sir jame made noremark. to hi secret feel there wa someth repuls in awoman’s second marriag, and no match would prevent him from feel ita sort of desecr for dorothea. he wa awar that the world wouldregard such a sentiment as preposter, especi in relat to awoman of on-and-twenti; the practic of “the world” be to treat ofa young widow’s second marriag as certain and probabl near, and tosmil with mean if the widow act accordingli. but if dorothea didchoos to espous her solitud, he felt that the resolut would wellbecom her.chapter lvi.“how happi is he born and taughtthat serveth not anoth’s will;whose armor is hi honest thought,and simpl truth hi onli skill!. . . . . . .thi man is freed from servil bandsof hope to rise or fear to fall;lord of himself though not of land;and have noth yet hath all.”—sir henri wotton.dorothea’s confid in caleb garth’s knowledg, which had begun onher hear that he approv of her cottag, had grown fast dure herstai at freshitt, sir jame have induc her to take ride over thetwo estat in compani with himself and caleb, who quit return heradmir, and told hi wife that mr. casaubon had a head forbusi most uncommon in a woman. it must be rememb that by“busi” caleb never meant monei transact, but the skilfulappl of labor.“most uncommon!” repeat caleb. “she said a thing i often us tothink myself when i wa a lad:—‘mr. garth, i should like to feel, if iliv to be old, that i had improv a great piec of land and built agreat mani good cottag, becaus the work is of a healthi kind whileit is be done, and after it is done, men ar the better for it.’those were the veri word: she see into thing in that wai.”“but womanli, i hope,” said mr. garth, half suspect that mr.casaubon might not hold the true principl of subordin.“oh, you can’t think!” said caleb, shake hi head. “you would like tohear her speak, susan. she speak in such plain word, and a voic likemus. bless me! it remind me of bit in the ‘messiah’—‘andstraightwai there appear a multitud of the heavenli host, praisinggod and sai;’ it ha a tone with it that satisfi your ear.”caleb wa veri fond of music, and when he could afford it went to hearan oratorio that came within hi reach, return from it with aprofound rever for thi mighti structur of tone, which made himsit medit, look on the floor and throw much unutterablelanguag into hi outstretch hand.with thi good understand between them, it wa natur that dorotheaask mr. garth to undertak ani busi connect with the threefarm and the numer tenement attach to lowick manor; inde, hisexpect of get work for two wa be fast fulfil. as hesaid, “busi breed.” and on form of busi which wa beginningto breed just then wa the construct of railwai. a project linewa to run through lowick parish where the cattl had hitherto grazedin a peac unbroken by astonish; and thu it happen that theinfant struggl of the railwai system enter into the affair ofcaleb garth, and determin the cours of thi histori with regard totwo person who were dear to him. the submarin railwai mai have itsdifficulti; but the bed of the sea is not divid among variousland proprietor with claim for damag not onli measur butsentiment. in the hundr to which middlemarch belong railwai werea excit a topic as the reform bill or the immin horror ofcholera, and those who held the most decid view on the subject werewomen and landhold. women both old and young regard travel bysteam as presumptu and danger, and argu against it by sayingthat noth should induc them to get into a railwai carriag; whileproprietor, differ from each other in their argument as much asmr. solomon featherston differ from lord medlicot, were yetunanim in the opinion that in sell land, whether to the enemi ofmankind or to a compani oblig to purchas, these pernici agenciesmust be made to pai a veri high price to landown for permiss toinjur mankind.but the slower wit, such as mr. solomon and mr. waul, who bothoccupi land of their own, took a long time to arriv at thisconclus, their mind halt at the vivid concept of what itwould be to cut the big pastur in two, and turn it into three-corneredbit, which would be “nohow;” while accommod-bridg and highpay were remot and incred.“the cow will all cast their calv, brother,” said mr. waul, in aton of deep melancholi, “if the railwai come across the near close;and i shouldn’t wonder at the mare too, if she wa in foal. it’s a poortal if a widow’s properti is to be spade awai, and the law saynoth to it. what’s to hinder ’em from cut right and left if theybegin? it’s well known, _i_ can’t fight.”“the best wai would be to sai noth, and set somebodi on to send ’emawai with a flea in their ear, when thei came spy and measur,”said solomon. “folk did that about brass, by what i can understand.it’s all a pretenc, if the truth wa known, about their be forcedto take on wai. let ’em go cut in anoth parish. and i don’tbeliev in ani pai to make amend for bring a lot of ruffian totrampl your crop. where’s a compani’s pocket?”“brother peter, god forgiv him, got monei out of a compani,” said mr.waul. “but that wa for the manganes. that wasn’t for railwai toblow you to piec right and left.”“well, there’s thi to be said, jane,” mr. solomon conclud, loweringhi voic in a cautiou manner—“the more spoke we put in their wheel,the more thei’ll pai us to let ’em go on, if thei must come whether ornot.”thi reason of mr. solomon’s wa perhap less thorough than heimagin, hi cun bear about the same relat to the cours ofrailwai as the cun of a diplomatist bear to the gener chill orcatarrh of the solar system. but he set about act on hi view in athoroughli diplomat manner, by stimul suspicion. hi side oflowick wa the most remot from the villag, and the hous of thelabor peopl were either lone cottag or were collect in a hamletcal frick, where a water-mill and some stone-pit made a littlecentr of slow, heavi-shoulder industri.in the absenc of ani precis idea as to what railwai were, publicopinion in frick wa against them; for the human mind in that grassycorn had not the proverbi tendenc to admir the unknown, holdingrath that it wa like to be against the poor man, and thatsuspicion wa the onli wise attitud with regard to it. even the rumorof reform had not yet excit ani millenni expect in frick,there be no definit promis in it, as of gratuit grain tofatten hiram ford’s pig, or of a publican at the “weight and scale”who would brew beer for noth, or of an offer on the part of thethre neighbor farmer to rais wage dure winter. and withoutdistinct good of thi kind in it promis, reform seem on a footingwith the brag of pedler, which wa a hint for distrust to everyknow person. the men of frick were not ill-fed, and were less givento fanatic than to a strong muscular suspicion; less inclin tobeliev that thei were peculiarli care for by heaven, than to regardheaven itself as rather dispos to take them in—a dispositionobserv in the weather.thu the mind of frick wa exactli of the sort for mr. solomonfeatherston to work upon, he have more plenteou idea of the sameord, with a suspicion of heaven and earth which wa better fed andmor entir at leisur. solomon wa overs of the road at thattim, and on hi slow-pace cob often took hi round by frick to lookat the workmen get the stone there, paus with a mysteriousdeliber, which might have misl you into suppos that he hadsom other reason for stai than the mere want of impuls to move.after look for a long while at ani work that wa go on, he wouldrais hi ey a littl and look at the horizon; final he would shakehi bridl, touch hi hors with the whip, and get it to move slowlyonward. the hour-hand of a clock wa quick by comparison with mr.solomon, who had an agreeabl sens that he could afford to be slow. hewa in the habit of paus for a cautiou, vagu design chat witheveri hedger or ditcher on hi wai, and wa especi will tolisten even to new which he had heard befor, feel himself at anadvantag over all narrat in partial disbeliev them. on dai,howev, he got into a dialogu with hiram ford, a wagon, in which hehimself contribut inform. he wish to know whether hiram hadseen fellow with stave and instrument spy about: thei calledthemselv railroad peopl, but there wa no tell what thei were orwhat thei meant to do. the least thei pretend wa that thei werego to cut lowick parish into six and seven.“why, there’ll be no stirrin’ from on pla-ac to anoth,” said hiram,think of hi wagon and hors.“not a bit,” said mr. solomon. “and cut up fine land such as thisparish! let ’em go into tipton, sai i. but there’s no know whatther is at the bottom of it. traffic is what thei put for’ard; butit’s to do harm to the land and the poor man in the long-run.”“why, thei’re lunnon chap, i reckon,” said hiram, who had a dim notionof london as a centr of hostil to the countri.“ay, to be sure. and in some part against brass, by what i’ve heardsai, the folk fell on ’em when thei were spy, and broke theirpeep-hole as thei carri, and drove ’em awai, so as thei knew betterthan come again.”“it war good foon, i’d be bound,” said hiram, whose fun wa muchrestrict by circumst.“well, i wouldn’t meddl with ’em myself,” said solomon. “but some saythi countri’s seen it best dai, and the sign is, as it’s beingoverrun with these fellow trampl right and left, and want to cutit up into railwai; and all for the big traffic to swallow up thelittl, so as there shan’t be a team left on the land, nor a whip tocrack.”“i’ll crack _my_ whip about their ear’n, afor thei bring it to that,though,” said hiram, while mr. solomon, shake hi bridl, movedonward.nettl-seed need no dig. the ruin of thi countrysid by railroadswa discuss, not onli at the “weight and scale,” but in thehai-field, where the muster of work hand gave opportun fortalk such as were rare had through the rural year.on morn, not long after that interview between mr. farebroth andmari garth, in which she confess to him her feel for fred vinci,it happen that her father had some busi which took him toyoddrel’s farm in the direct of frick: it wa to measur and valuean outli piec of land belong to lowick manor, which calebexpect to dispos of advantag for dorothea (it must beconfess that hi bia wa toward get the best possibl termsfrom railroad compani). he put up hi gig at yoddrel’s, and inwalk with hi assist and measur-chain to the scene of hiswork, he encount the parti of the compani’s agent, who wereadjust their spirit-level. after a littl chat he left them,observ that by-and-by thei would reach him again where he wa goingto measur. it wa on of those grai morn after light rain, whichbecom delici about twelv o’clock, when the cloud part a littl,and the scent of the earth is sweet along the lane and by thehedgerow.the scent would have been sweeter to fred vinci, who wa come alongth lane on horseback, if hi mind had not been worri byunsuccess effort to imagin what he wa to do, with hi father onon side expect him straightwai to enter the church, with mari onth other threaten to forsak him if he did enter it, and with thework-dai world show no eager need whatev of a young gentlemanwithout capit and gener unskil. it wa the harder to fred’sdisposit becaus hi father, satisfi that he wa no longerrebelli, wa in good humor with him, and had sent him on thispleas ride to see after some greyhound. even when he had fix onwhat he should do, there would be the task of tell hi father. butit must be admit that the fix, which had to come first, wa themor difficult task:—what secular avoc on earth wa there for ayoung man (whose friend could not get him an “appoint”) which wasat onc gentlemanli, lucr, and to be follow without specialknowledg? ride along the lane by frick in thi mood, and slackeninghi pace while he reflect whether he should ventur to go round bylowick parsonag to call on mari, he could see over the hedg from onefield to anoth. suddenli a nois rous hi attent, and on the farsid of a field on hi left hand he could see six or seven men insmock-frock with hai-fork in their hand make an offens approachtoward the four railwai agent who were face them, while caleb garthand hi assist were hasten across the field to join thethreaten group. fred, delai a few moment by have to find thegat, could not gallop up to the spot befor the parti in smock-frock,whose work of turn the hai had not been too press afterswallow their mid-dai beer, were drive the men in coat beforethem with their hai-fork; while caleb garth’s assist, a lad ofseventeen, who had snatch up the spirit-level at caleb’s order, hadbeen knock down and seem to be ly helpless. the coat men hadth advantag as runner, and fred cover their retreat by get infront of the smock-frock and charg them suddenli enough to throwtheir chase into confus. “what do you confound fool mean?”shout fred, pursu the divid group in a zigzag, and cut rightand left with hi whip. “i’ll swear to everi on of you befor themagistr. you’ve knock the lad down and kill him, for what iknow. you’ll everi on of you be hang at the next assiz, if youdon’t mind,” said fred, who afterward laugh heartili as herememb hi own phrase.the labor had been driven through the gate-wai into their hai-field,and fred had check hi hors, when hiram ford, observ himself at asaf challeng distanc, turn back and shout a defianc which hedid not know to be homer.“yo’re a coward, yo ar. yo git off your hors, young measter, and i’llhave a round wi’ ye, i wull. yo daredn’t come on wi’out your hoss an’whip. i’d soon knock the breath out on ye, i would.”“wait a minut, and i’ll come back present, and have a round with youall in turn, if you like,” said fred, who felt confid in hi powerof box with hi dearli belov brethren. but just now he want tohasten back to caleb and the prostrat youth.the lad’s ankl wa strain, and he wa in much pain from it, but hewa no further hurt, and fred place him on the hors that he mightrid to yoddrel’s and be taken care of there.“let them put the hors in the stabl, and tell the surveyor thei cancom back for their trap,” said fred. “the ground is clear now.”“no, no,” said caleb, “here’s a breakag. thei’ll have to give up forto-dai, and it will be as well. here, take the thing befor you on thehors, tom. thei’ll see you come, and thei’ll turn back.”“i’m glad i happen to be here at the right moment, mr. garth,” saidfr, as tom rode awai. “no know what might have happen if thecavalri had not come up in time.”“ay, ay, it wa lucki,” said caleb, speak rather absent, andlook toward the spot where he had been at work at the moment ofinterrupt. “but—deuc take it—thi is what come of men beingfool—i’m hinder of my dai’s work. i can’t get along without somebodyto help me with the measur-chain. howev!” he wa begin to movetoward the spot with a look of vexat, as if he had forgotten fred’spresenc, but suddenli he turn round and said quickli, “what have yougot to do to-dai, young fellow?”“noth, mr. garth. i’ll help you with pleasur—can i?” said fred,with a sens that he should be court mari when he wa help herfath.“well, you mustn’t mind stoop and get hot.”“i don’t mind anyth. onli i want to go first and have a round withthat hulki fellow who turn to challeng me. it would be a good lessonfor him. i shall not be five minut.”“nonsens!” said caleb, with hi most peremptori inton. “i shallgo and speak to the men myself. it’s all ignor. somebodi ha beentel them li. the poor fool don’t know ani better.”“i shall go with you, then,” said fred.“no, no; stai where you ar. i don’t want your young blood. i can takecar of myself.”caleb wa a power man and knew littl of ani fear except the fear ofhurt other and the fear of have to speechifi. but he felt it hisduti at thi moment to try and give a littl harangu. there wa astrik mixtur in him—which came from hi have alwai been ahard-work man himself—of rigor notion about workmen andpract indulg toward them. to do a good dai’s work and to do itwel, he held to be part of their welfar, as it wa the chief part ofhi own happi; but he had a strong sens of fellowship with them.when he advanc toward the labor thei had not gone to work again,but were stand in that form of rural group which consist in eachturn a shoulder toward the other, at a distanc of two or threeyard. thei look rather sulkili at caleb, who walk quickli with onehand in hi pocket and the other thrust between the button of hiswaistcoat, and had hi everi-dai mild air when he paus among them.“why, my lad, how’s thi?” he began, take as usual to brief phrase,which seem pregnant to himself, becaus he had mani thought lyingund them, like the abund root of a plant that just manag topeep abov the water. “how came you to make such a mistak as thi?somebodi ha been tell you li. you thought those men up therew to do mischief.”“aw!” wa the answer, drop at interv by each accord to hisdegre of unreadi.“nonsens! no such thing! thei’re look out to see which wai therailroad is to take. now, my lad, you can’t hinder the railroad: itwil be made whether you like it or not. and if you go fight againstit, you’ll get yourselv into troubl. the law give those men leaveto come here on the land. the owner ha noth to sai against it, andif you meddl with them you’ll have to do with the constabl andjustic blakeslei, and with the handcuff and middlemarch jail. and youmight be in for it now, if anybodi inform against you.”caleb paus here, and perhap the greatest orat could not havechosen either hi paus or hi imag better for the occas.“but come, you didn’t mean ani harm. somebodi told you the railroad wasa bad thing. that wa a lie. it mai do a bit of harm here and there, tothi and to that; and so doe the sun in heaven. but the railwai’s agood thing.”“aw! good for the big folk to make monei out on,” said old timothycoop, who had stai behind turn hi hai while the other had beengon on their spree;—“i’n seen lot o’ thing turn up sin’ i war ayoung un—the war an’ the peac, and the canel, an’ the oald kinggeorg, an’ the regen’, an’ the new king georg, an’ the new un as hasgot a new ne-am—an’ it’s been all aloik to the poor mon. what’s thecanel been t’ him? thei’n brought him neyther me-at nor be-acon, norwag to lai by, if he didn’t save it wi’ clemmin’ hi own insid. timesha’ got wusser for him sin’ i war a young un. an’ so it’ll be wi’ therailroad. thei’ll on’y leav the poor mon furder behind. but them arefool as meddl, and so i told the chap here. thi is the big folk’sworld, thi is. but yo’re for the big folk, muster garth, yo ar.”timothi wa a wiri old labor, of a type linger in those time—whohad hi save in a stock-foot, live in a lone cottag, and wasnot to be wrought on by ani oratori, have as littl of the feudalspirit, and believ as littl, as if he had not been totallyunacquaint with the ag of reason and the right of man. caleb wa ina difficulti known to ani person attempt in dark time andunassist by miracl to reason with rustic who ar in possess ofan undeni truth which thei know through a hard process of feel,and can let it fall like a giant’s club on your neatli carv argumentfor a social benefit which thei do not feel. caleb had no cant atcommand, even if he could have chosen to us it; and he had beenaccustom to meet all such difficulti in no other wai than by doinghi “busi” faithfulli. he answer—“if you don’t think well of me, tim, never mind; that’s neither herenor there now. thing mai be bad for the poor man—bad thei ar; but iwant the lad here not to do what will make thing wors forthemselv. the cattl mai have a heavi load, but it won’t help ’em tothrow it over into the roadsid pit, when it’s partli their ownfodd.”“we war on’y for a bit o’ foon,” said hiram, who wa begin to seeconsequ. “that war all we war arter.”“well, promis me not to meddl again, and i’ll see that nobodi informsagainst you.”“i’n ne’er meddl, an’ i’n no call to promis,” said timothi.“no, but the rest. come, i’m as hard at work as ani of you to-dai, andi can’t spare much time. sai you’ll be quiet without the constabl.”“aw, we wooant meddl—thei mai do as thei loik for oo”—were the formsin which caleb got hi pledg; and then he hasten back to fred, whohad follow him, and watch him in the gatewai.thei went to work, and fred help vigor. hi spirit had risen,and he heartili enjoi a good slip in the moist earth under thehedgerow, which soil hi perfect summer trouser. wa it hissuccess onset which had elat him, or the satisfact of helpingmari’s father? someth more. the accid of the morn had helpedhi frustrat imagin to shape an employ for himself which hadsever attract. i am not sure that certain fibr in mr. garth’smind had not resum their old vibrat toward the veri end which nowrev itself to fred. for the effect accid is but the touch offir where there is oil and tow; and it alwai appear to fred thatth railwai brought the need touch. but thei went on in silenceexcept when their busi demand speech. at last, when thei hadfinish and were walk awai, mr. garth said—“a young fellow needn’t be a b. a. to do thi sort of work, eh, fred?”“i wish i had taken to it befor i had thought of be a b. a.,” saidfr. he paus a moment, and then ad, more hesitatingli, “do youthink i am too old to learn your busi, mr. garth?”“my busi is of mani sort, my boi,” said mr. garth, smile. “agood deal of what i know can onli come from experi: you can’t learnit off as you learn thing out of a book. but you ar young enough tolai a foundat yet.” caleb pronounc the last sentenc emphat,but paus in some uncertainti. he had been under the impress latelythat fred had made up hi mind to enter the church.“you do think i could do some good at it, if i were to try?” said fred,more eagerli.“that depend,” said caleb, turn hi head on on side and loweringhi voic, with the air of a man who felt himself to be sayingsometh deepli religi. “you must be sure of two thing: you mustlov your work, and not be alwai look over the edg of it, wantingyour plai to begin. and the other is, you must not be asham of yourwork, and think it would be more honor to you to be do somethingels. you must have a pride in your own work and in learn to do itwel, and not be alwai sai, there’s thi and there’s that—if i hadthi or that to do, i might make someth of it. no matter what a mani—i wouldn’t give twopenc for him”—here caleb’s mouth look bitter,and he snap hi finger—“whether he wa the prime minist or therick-thatcher, if he didn’t do well what he undertook to do.”“i can never feel that i should do that in be a clergyman,” saidfr, mean to take a step in argument.“then let it alon, my boi,” said caleb, abruptli, “els you’ll neverb easi. or, if you _ar_ easi, you’ll be a poor stick.”“that is veri nearli what mari think about it,” said fred, color.“i think you must know what i feel for mari, mr. garth: i hope it doesnot displeas you that i have alwai love her better than ani oneels, and that i shall never love ani on as i love her.”the express of caleb’s face wa visibl soften while fred spoke.but he swung hi head with a solemn slow, and said—“that make thing more seriou, fred, if you want to take mari’shappi into your keep.”“i know that, mr. garth,” said fred, eagerli, “and i would do anythingfor _her_. she sai she will never have me if i go into the church; andi shall be the most miser devil in the world if i lose all hope ofmari. realli, if i could get some other profess, busi—anythingthat i am at all fit for, i would work hard, i would deserv your goodopinion. i should like to have to do with outdoor thing. i know a gooddeal about land and cattl alreadi. i us to believ, you know—thoughyou will think me rather foolish for it—that i should have land of myown. i am sure knowledg of that sort would come easili to me,especi if i could be under you in ani wai.”“softli, my boi,” said caleb, have the imag of “susan” befor hisey. “what have you said to your father about all thi?”“noth, yet; but i must tell him. i am onli wait to know what ican do instead of enter the church. i am veri sorri to disappointhim, but a man ought to be allow to judg for himself when he isfour-and-twenti. how could i know when i wa fifteen, what it would beright for me to do now? my educ wa a mistak.”“but hearken to thi, fred,” said caleb. “ar you sure mari is fond ofyou, or would ever have you?”“i ask mr. farebroth to talk to her, becaus she had forbidden me—ididn’t know what els to do,” said fred, apologet. “and he saysthat i have everi reason to hope, if i can put myself in an honorableposit—i mean, out of the church. i dare sai you think itunwarrant in me, mr. garth, to be troubl you and obtrud myown wish about mari, befor i have done anyth at all for myself.of cours i have not the least claim—inde, i have alreadi a debt toyou which will never be discharg, even when i have been abl to payit in the shape of monei.”“ye, my boi, you have a claim,” said caleb, with much feel in hisvoic. “the young on have alwai a claim on the old to help themforward. i wa young myself onc and had to do without much help; buthelp would have been welcom to me, if it had been onli for thefellow-feel’s sake. but i must consid. come to me to-morrow at theoffic, at nine o’clock. at the offic, mind.”mr. garth would take no import step without consult susan, but itmust be confess that befor he reach home he had taken hisresolut. with regard to a larg number of matter about which othermen ar decid or obstin, he wa the most easili manag man inth world. he never knew what meat he would choos, and if susan hadsaid that thei ought to live in a four-room cottag, in order tosav, he would have said, “let us go,” without inquir into detail.but where caleb’s feel and judgment strongli pronounc, he wa arul; and in spite of hi mild and timid in reprov, everyon about him knew that on the except occas when he chose, hewa absolut. he never, inde, chose to be absolut except on some oneels’s behalf. on nineti-nine point mr. garth decid, but on thehundredth she wa often awar that she would have to perform thesingularli difficult task of carri out her own principl, and tomak herself subordin.“it is come round as i thought, susan,” said caleb, when thei weres alon in the even. he had alreadi narrat the adventurewhich had brought about fred’s share in hi work, but had kept backth further result. “the children _ar_ fond of each other—i mean, fredand mari.”mr. garth laid her work on her knee, and fix her penetr eyesanxi on her husband.“after we’d done our work, fred pour it all out to me. he can’t bearto be a clergyman, and mari sai she won’t have him if he is on; andth lad would like to be under me and give hi mind to busi. andi’ve determin to take him and make a man of him.”“caleb!” said mr. garth, in a deep contralto, express of resignedastonish.“it’s a fine thing to do,” said mr. garth, settl himself firmlyagainst the back of hi chair, and grasp the elbow. “i shall havetroubl with him, but i think i shall carri it through. the lad lovesmari, and a true love for a good woman is a great thing, susan. itshap mani a rough fellow.”“ha mari spoken to you on the subject?” said mr garth, secretli alittl hurt that she had to be inform on it herself.“not a word. i ask her about fred onc; i gave her a bit of awarn. but she assur me she would never marri an idleself-indulg man—noth sinc. but it seem fred set on mr.farebroth to talk to her, becaus she had forbidden him to speakhimself, and mr. farebroth ha found out that she is fond of fred,but sai he must not be a clergyman. fred’s heart is fix on mari,that i can see: it give me a good opinion of the lad—and we alwayslik him, susan.”“it is a piti for mari, i think,” said mr. garth.“why—a piti?”“becaus, caleb, she might have had a man who is worth twenti fredvinci’s.”“ah?” said caleb, with surpris.“i firmli believ that mr. farebroth is attach to her, and meant tomak her an offer; but of cours, now that fred ha us him as anenvoi, there is an end to that better prospect.” there wa a severeprecis in mr. garth’s utter. she wa vex and disappoint,but she wa bent on abstain from useless word.caleb wa silent a few moment under a conflict of feel. he lookedat the floor and move hi head and hand in accompani to someinward argument. at last he said—“that would have made me veri proud and happi, susan, and i should havebeen glad for your sake. i’ve alwai felt that your belong havenev been on a level with you. but you took me, though i wa a plainman.”“i took the best and cleverest man i had ever known,” said mr. garth,convinc that _she_ would never have love ani on who came short ofthat mark.“well, perhap other thought you might have done better. but it wouldhav been wors for me. and that is what touch me close about fred.the lad is good at bottom, and clever enough to do, if he’s put in theright wai; and he love and honor my daughter beyond anyth, and sheha given him a sort of promis accord to what he turn out. i sai,that young man’s soul is in my hand; and i’ll do the best i can forhim, so help me god! it’s my duti, susan.”mr. garth wa not given to tear, but there wa a larg on rollingdown her face befor her husband had finish. it came from thepressur of variou feel, in which there wa much affect andsom vexat. she wipe it awai quickli, sai—“few men besid you would think it a duti to add to their anxieti inthat wai, caleb.”“that signifi noth—what other men would think. i’ve got a clearfeel insid me, and that i shall follow; and i hope your heart willgo with me, susan, in make everyth as light as can be to mari,poor child.”caleb, lean back in hi chair, look with anxiou appeal towardshi wife. she rose and kiss him, sai, “god bless you, caleb! ourchildren have a good father.”but she went out and had a hearti cry to make up for the suppress ofher word. she felt sure that her husband’s conduct would bemisunderstood, and about fred she wa ration and unhop. whichwould turn out to have the more foresight in it—her ration orcaleb’s ardent generos?when fred went to the offic the next morn, there wa a test to begon through which he wa not prepar for.“now fred,” said caleb, “you will have some desk-work. i have alwaysdon a good deal of write myself, but i can’t do without help, and asi want you to understand the account and get the valu into yourhead, i mean to do without anoth clerk. so you must buckl to. howar you at write and arithmet?”fred felt an awkward movement of the heart; he had not thought ofdesk-work; but he wa in a resolut mood, and not go to shrink. “i’mnot afraid of arithmet, mr. garth: it alwai came easili to me. ithink you know my write.”“let us see,” said caleb, take up a pen, examin it carefulli andhand it, well dip, to fred with a sheet of rule paper. “copi mea line or two of that valuat, with the figur at the end.”at that time the opinion exist that it wa beneath a gentleman towrit legibl, or with a hand in the least suitabl to a clerk. fredwrot the line demand in a hand as gentlemanli as that of anyviscount or bishop of the dai: the vowel were all alik and theconson onli distinguish as turn up or down, the stroke hada blot solid and the letter disdain to keep the line—in short,it wa a manuscript of that vener kind easi to interpret when youknow beforehand what the writer mean.as caleb look on, hi visag show a grow depress, but whenfr hand him the paper he gave someth like a snarl, and rappedth paper passion with the back of hi hand. bad work like thisdispel all caleb’s mild.“the deuc!” he exclaim, snarlingli. “to think that thi is a countrywher a man’s educ mai cost hundr and hundr, and it turnsyou out thi!” then in a more pathet tone, push up hi spectaclesand look at the unfortun scribe, “the lord have merci on us,fred, i can’t put up with thi!”“what can i do, mr. garth?” said fred, whose spirit had sunk veri low,not onli at the estim of hi handwrit, but at the vision ofhimself as liabl to be rank with offic clerk.“do? why, you must learn to form your letter and keep the line. what’sthe us of write at all if nobodi can understand it?” ask caleb,energet, quit preoccupi with the bad qualiti of the work. “isther so littl busi in the world that you must be send puzzlesov the countri? but that’s the wai peopl ar brought up. i shouldlos no end of time with the letter some peopl send me, if susan didnot make them out for me. it’s disgust.” here caleb toss the paperfrom him.ani stranger peep into the offic at that moment might have wonderedwhat wa the drama between the indign man of busi, and thefin-look young fellow whose blond complexion wa get ratherpatchi as he bit hi lip with mortif. fred wa struggl withmani thought. mr. garth had been so kind and encourag at thebegin of their interview, that gratitud and hope had beenat a high pitch, and the downfal wa proportion. he had not thoughtof desk-work—in fact, like the major of young gentlemen, he wantedan occup which should be free from disagre. i cannot tellwhat might have been the consequ if he had not distinctli promisedhimself that he would go to lowick to see mari and tell her that he wasengag to work under her father. he did not like to disappoint himselfther.“i am veri sorri,” were all the word that he could muster. but mr.garth wa alreadi relent.“we must make the best of it, fred,” he began, with a return to hisusu quiet tone. “everi man can learn to write. i taught myself. go atit with a will, and sit up at night if the dai-time isn’t enough. we’llbe patient, my boi. callum shall go on with the book for a bit, whiley ar learn. but now i must be off,” said caleb, rise. “you mustlet your father know our agreement. you’ll save me callum’s salari, youknow, when you can write; and i can afford to give you eighti poundsfor the first year, and more after.”when fred made the necessari disclosur to hi parent, the relativeeffect on the two wa a surpris which enter veri deepli into hismemori. he went straight from mr. garth’s offic to the warehous,rightli feel that the most respect wai in which he could behaveto hi father wa to make the pain commun as grave andform as possibl. moreov, the decis would be more certainlyunderstood to be final, if the interview took place in hi father’sgravest hour, which were alwai those spent in hi privat room at thewarehous.fred enter on the subject directli, and declar briefli what he haddon and wa resolv to do, express at the end hi regret that heshould be the caus of disappoint to hi father, and take theblam on hi own defici. the regret wa genuin, and inspiredfr with strong, simpl word.mr. vinci listen in profound surpris without utter even anexclam, a silenc which in hi impati tempera wa a sign ofunusu emot. he had not been in good spirit about trade thatmorn, and the slight bitter in hi lip grew intens as helisten. when fred had end, there wa a paus of nearli a minut,dure which mr. vinci replac a book in hi desk and turn the keyemphat. then he look at hi son steadili, and said—“so you’ve made up your mind at last, sir?”“ye, father.”“veri well; stick to it. i’ve no more to sai. you’ve thrown awai youreduc, and gone down a step in life, when i had given you the meansof rise, that’s all.”“i am veri sorri that we differ, father. i think i can be quit as muchof a gentleman at the work i have undertaken, as if i had been acur. but i am grate to you for wish to do the best for me.”“veri well; i have no more to sai. i wash my hand of you. i onli hope,when you have a son of your own he will make a better return for thepain you spend on him.”thi wa veri cut to fred. hi father wa us that unfairadvantag possess by us all when we ar in a pathet situat andse our own past as if it were simpli part of the patho. in realiti,mr. vinci’s wish about hi son had had a great deal of pride,inconsider, and egoist folli in them. but still thedisappoint father held a strong lever; and fred felt as if he wereb banish with a maledict.“i hope you will not object to my remain at home, sir?” he said,after rise to go; “i shall have a suffici salari to pai for myboard, as of cours i should wish to do.”“board be hang!” said mr. vinci, recov himself in hi disgust atth notion that fred’s keep would be miss at hi tabl. “of courseyour mother will want you to stai. but i shall keep no hors for you,you understand; and you will pai your own tailor. you will do with asuit or two less, i fanci, when you have to pai for ’em.”fred linger; there wa still someth to be said. at last it came.“i hope you will shake hand with me, father, and forgiv me thevex i have caus you.”mr. vinci from hi chair threw a quick glanc upward at hi son, whohad advanc near to him, and then gave hi hand, sai hurriedli,“ye, ye, let us sai no more.”fred went through much more narr and explan with hi mother,but she wa inconsol, have befor her ey what perhap herhusband had never thought of, the certainti that fred would marri marygarth, that her life would henceforth be spoil by a perpetualinfus of garth and their wai, and that her darl boi, with hisbeauti face and stylish air “beyond anybodi els’s son inmiddlemarch,” would be sure to get like that famili in plain ofappear and careless about hi cloth. to her it seem thatther wa a garth conspiraci to get possess of the desir fred,but she dare not enlarg on thi opinion, becaus a slight hint of ithad made him “fly out” at her as he had never done befor. her temperwa too sweet for her to show ani anger, but she felt that herhappi had receiv a bruis, and for sever dai mere to look atfr made her cry a littl as if he were the subject of some balefulpropheci. perhap she wa the slower to recov her usual cheerfulnessbecaus fred had warn her that she must not reopen the sore questionwith hi father, who had accept hi decis and forgiven him. if herhusband had been vehement against fred, she would have been urg intodef of her darl. it wa the end of the fourth dai when mr. vincysaid to her—“come, luci, my dear, don’t be so down-heart. you alwai have spoiledth boi, and you must go on spoil him.”“noth ever did cut me so befor, vinci,” said the wife, her fairthroat and chin begin to trembl again, “onli hi ill.”“pooh, pooh, never mind! we must expect to have troubl with ourchildren. don’t make it wors by let me see you out of spirit.”“well, i won’t,” said mr. vinci, rous by thi appeal and adjustingherself with a littl shake as of a bird which lai down it ruffledplumag.“it won’t do to begin make a fuss about on,” said mr. vinci, wishingto combin a littl grumbl with domest cheer. “there’srosamond as well as fred.”“ye, poor thing. i’m sure i felt for her be disappoint of herbabi; but she got over it nice.”“babi, pooh! i can see lydgat is make a mess of hi practic, andget into debt too, by what i hear. i shall have rosamond come tome with a pretti tale on of these dai. but thei’ll get no monei fromm, i know. let _hi_ famili help him. i never did like that marriag.but it’s no us talk. ring the bell for lemon, and don’t look dullani more, luci. i’ll drive you and louisa to riverston to-morrow.”chapter lvii.thei number scarc eight summer when a name rose on their soul and stir such motion therea thrill the bud and shape their hidden frame at penetr of the quicken air:hi name who told of loyal evan dhu, of quaint bradwardin, and vich ian vor,make the littl world their childhood knew larg with a land of mountain lake and scaur,and larger yet with wonder, love, belief toward walter scott who live far aways them thi wealth of joi and nobl grief. the book and thei must part, but dai by dai, in line that thwart like portli spider ran thei wrote the tale, from tulli veolan.the even that fred vinci walk to lowick parsonag (he had begun tose that thi wa a world in which even a spirit young man mustsometim walk for want of a hors to carri him) he set out at fiveo’clock and call on mr. garth by the wai, wish to assur himselfthat she accept their new relat willingli.he found the famili group, dog and cat includ, under the greatappl-tree in the orchard. it wa a festiv with mr. garth, for hereldest son, christi, her peculiar joi and pride, had come home for ashort holidai—christi, who held it the most desir thing in theworld to be a tutor, to studi all literatur and be a regenerateporson, and who wa an incorpor critic on poor fred, a sort ofobject-lesson given to him by the educ mother. christi himself,a squar-brow, broad-shoulder masculin edit of hi mother notmuch higher than fred’s shoulder—which made it the harder that heshould be held superior—wa alwai as simpl as possibl, and thoughtno more of fred’s disinclin to scholarship than of a giraff’s,wish that he himself were more of the same height. he wa ly onth ground now by hi mother’s chair, with hi straw hat laid flat overhi ey, while jim on the other side wa read aloud from thatbelov writer who ha made a chief part in the happi of mani youngliv. the volum wa “ivanho,” and jim wa in the great archeri sceneat the tournament, but suffer much interrupt from ben, who hadfetch hi own old bow and arrow, and wa make himself dreadfullydisagre, letti thought, by beg all present to observ hisrandom shot, which no on wish to do except browni, theactiv-mind but probabl shallow mongrel, while the grizzlednewfoundland ly in the sun look on with the dull-ei neutralityof extrem old ag. letti herself, show as to her mouth and pinaforesom slight sign that she had been assist at the gather of thecherri which stood in a coral-heap on the tea-tabl, wa now seatedon the grass, listen open-ei to the read.but the centr of interest wa chang for all by the arriv of fredvinci. when, seat himself on a garden-stool, he said that he wa onhi wai to lowick parsonag, ben, who had thrown down hi bow, andsnatch up a reluct half-grown kitten instead, strode across fred’soutstretch leg, and said “take me!”“oh, and me too,” said letti.“you can’t keep up with fred and me,” said ben.“ye, i can. mother, pleas sai that i am to go,” urg letti, whoselif wa much checker by resist to her depreci as a girl.“i shall stai with christi,” observ jim; as much as to sai that hehad the advantag of those simpleton; whereupon letti put her hand upto her head and look with jealou indecis from the on to theother.“let us all go and see mari,” said christi, open hi arm.“no, my dear child, we must not go in a swarm to the parsonag. andthat old glasgow suit of your would never do. besid, your fatherwil come home. we must let fred go alon. he can tell mari that youar here, and she will come back to-morrow.”christi glanc at hi own threadbar knee, and then at fred’sbeauti white trouser. certainli fred’s tailor suggest theadvantag of an english univers, and he had a grace wai even oflook warm and of push hi hair back with hi handkerchief.“children, run awai,” said mr. garth; “it is too warm to hang aboutyour friend. take your brother and show him the rabbit.”the eldest understood, and led off the children immedi. fred feltthat mr. garth wish to give him an opportun of sai anyth hehad to sai, but he could onli begin by observ—“how glad you must be to have christi here!”“ye; he ha come sooner than i expect. he got down from the coach atnin o’clock, just after hi father went out. i am long for caleb tocom and hear what wonder progress christi is make. he ha paidhi expens for the last year by give lesson, carri on hardstudi at the same time. he hope soon to get a privat tutorship and goabroad.”“he is a great fellow,” said fred, to whom these cheer truth had amedicin tast, “and no troubl to anybodi.” after a slight paus, head, “but i fear you will think that i am go to be a great deal oftroubl to mr. garth.”“caleb like take troubl: he is on of those men who alwai do morethan ani on would have thought of ask them to do,” answer mr.garth. she wa knit, and could either look at fred or not, as shechos—alwai an advantag when on is bent on load speech withsalutari mean; and though mr. garth intend to be duli reserv,she did wish to sai someth that fred might be the better for.“i know you think me veri undeserv, mr. garth, and with goodreason,” said fred, hi spirit rise a littl at the percept ofsometh like a disposit to lectur him. “i happen to have behavedjust the worst to the peopl i can’t help wish for the most from.but while two men like mr. garth and mr. farebroth have not given meup, i don’t see why i should give myself up.” fred thought it might bewel to suggest these masculin exampl to mr. garth.“assuredli,” said she, with gather emphasi. “a young man for whomtwo such elder had devot themselv would inde be culpabl if hethrew himself awai and made their sacrific vain.”fred wonder a littl at thi strong languag, but onli said, “i hopeit will not be so with me, mr. garth, sinc i have some encouragementto believ that i mai win mari. mr. garth ha told you about that? youwer not surpris, i dare sai?” fred end, innoc refer onlyto hi own love as probabl evid enough.“not surpris that mari ha given you encourag?” return mr.garth, who thought it would be well for fred to be more aliv to thefact that mari’s friend could not possibl have wish thisbeforehand, whatev the vinci might suppos. “ye, i confess i wassurpris.”“she never did give me ani—not the least in the world, when i talk toher myself,” said fred, eager to vindic mari. “but when i ask mr.farebroth to speak for me, she allow him to tell me there wa ahop.”the power of admonit which had begun to stir in mr. garth had notyet discharg itself. it wa a littl too provok even for _her_self-control that thi bloom youngster should flourish on thedisappoint of sadder and wiser peopl—make a meal of anightingal and never know it—and that all the while hi familyshould suppos that her wa in eager need of thi sprig; and hervex had ferment the more activ becaus of it totalrepress toward her husband. exemplari wive will sometim findscapegoat in thi wai. she now said with energet decis, “you madea great mistak, fred, in ask mr. farebroth to speak for you.”“did i?” said fred, redden instantan. he wa alarm, but at aloss to know what mr. garth meant, and ad, in an apologet tone,“mr. farebroth ha alwai been such a friend of our; and mari, iknew, would listen to him grave; and he took it on himself quitereadili.”“ye, young peopl ar usual blind to everyth but their ownwish, and seldom imagin how much those wish cost other,” saidmr. garth. she did not mean to go beyond thi salutari generaldoctrin, and threw her indign into a needless unwind of herworst, knit her brow at it with a grand air.“i cannot conceiv how it could be ani pain to mr. farebroth,” saidfr, who nevertheless felt that surpris concept were beginningto form themselv.“precis; you cannot conceiv,” said mr. garth, cut her word asneatli as possibl.for a moment fred look at the horizon with a dismai anxieti, andthen turn with a quick movement said almost sharpli—“do you mean to sai, mr. garth, that mr. farebroth is in love withmari?”“and if it were so, fred, i think you ar the last person who ought tobe surpris,” return mr. garth, lai her knit down besid herand fold her arm. it wa an unwont sign of emot in her thatsh should put her work out of her hand. in fact her feel weredivid between the satisfact of give fred hi disciplin and thesens of have gone a littl too far. fred took hi hat and stick andros quickli.“then you think i am stand in hi wai, and in mari’s too?” he said,in a tone which seem to demand an answer.mr. garth could not speak immedi. she had brought herself intoth unpleas posit of be call on to sai what she realli felt,yet what she knew there were strong reason for conceal. and to herth conscious of have exceed in word wa peculiarlymortifi. besid, fred had given out unexpect electr, and henow ad, “mr. garth seem pleas that mari should be attach tome. he could not have known anyth of thi.”mr. garth felt a sever twing at thi mention of her husband, thefear that caleb might think her in the wrong not be easilyendur. she answer, want to check unintend consequ—“i spoke from infer onli. i am not awar that mari know anythingof the matter.”but she hesit to beg that he would keep entir silenc on a subjectwhich she had herself unnecessarili mention, not be us to stoopin that wai; and while she wa hesit there wa alreadi a rush ofunintend consequ under the appl-tree where the tea-thingsstood. ben, bounc across the grass with browni at hi heel, andse the kitten drag the knit by a lengthen line of wool,shout and clap hi hand; browni bark, the kitten, desper,jump on the tea-tabl and upset the milk, then jump down again andswept half the cherri with it; and ben, snatch up the half-knittedsock-top, fit it over the kitten’s head as a new sourc of mad,while letti arriv cri out to her mother against thi cruelti—itwa a histori as full of sensat as “thi is the hous that jackbuilt.” mr. garth wa oblig to interfer, the other young on cameup and the _tête-à-tête_ with fred wa end. he got awai as soon as hecould, and mr. garth could onli impli some retract of hersever by sai “god bless you” when she shook hand with him.she wa unpleasantli consciou that she had been on the verg ofspeak as “on of the foolish women speaketh”—tell first andentr silenc after. but she had not entreat silenc, and toprev caleb’s blame she determin to blame herself and confess allto him that veri night. it wa curiou what an aw tribun the mildcaleb’s wa to her, whenev he set it up. but she meant to point outto him that the revel might do fred vinci a great deal of good.no doubt it wa have a strong effect on him as he walk to lowick.fred’s light hope natur had perhap never had so much of a bruisea from thi suggest that if he had been out of the wai mari mighthav made a thoroughli good match. also he wa piqu that he had beenwhat he call such a stupid lout as to ask that intervent from mr.farebroth. but it wa not in a lover’s natur—it wa not in fred’s,that the new anxieti rais about mari’s feel should not surmounteveri other. notwithstand hi trust in mr. farebroth’s generos,notwithstand what mari had said to him, fred could not help feelingthat he had a rival: it wa a new conscious, and he object to itextrem, not be in the least readi to give up mari for her good,be readi rather to fight for her with ani man whatsoev. but thefight with mr. farebroth must be of a metaphor kind, which wasmuch more difficult to fred than the muscular. certainli thisexperi wa a disciplin for fred hardli less sharp than hisdisappoint about hi uncl’s will. the iron had not enter intohi soul, but he had begun to imagin what the sharp edg would be. itdid not onc occur to fred that mr. garth might be mistaken about mr.farebroth, but he suspect that she might be wrong about mari. maryhad been stai at the parsonag late, and her mother might knowveri littl of what had been pass in her mind.he did not feel easier when he found her look cheer with thethre ladi in the draw-room. thei were in anim discuss onsom subject which wa drop when he enter, and mari wa copyingth label from a heap of shallow cabinet drawer, in a minutehandwrit which she wa skill in. mr. farebroth wa somewher inth villag, and the three ladi knew noth of fred’s peculiarrel to mari: it wa imposs for either of them to propos thatthei should walk round the garden, and fred predict to himself thath should have to go awai without sai a word to her in privat. hetold her first of christi’s arriv and then of hi own engag withher father; and he wa comfort by see that thi latter newstouch her keenli. she said hurriedli, “i am so glad,” and then bentov her write to hinder ani on from notic her face. but here wasa subject which mr. farebroth could not let pass.“you don’t mean, my dear miss garth, that you ar glad to hear of ayoung man give up the church for which he wa educ: you onli meanthat thing be so, you ar glad that he should be under an excellentman like your father.”“no, realli, mr. farebroth, i am glad of both, i fear,” said mari,cleverli get rid of on rebelli tear. “i have a dreadfullysecular mind. i never like ani clergyman except the vicar of wakefieldand mr. farebroth.”“now why, my dear?” said mr. farebroth, paus on her larg woodenknit-needl and look at mari. “you have alwai a good reasonfor your opinion, but thi astonish me. of cours i put out of thequest those who preach new doctrin. but why should you dislikeclergymen?”“oh dear,” said mari, her face break into merriment as she seem toconsid a moment, “i don’t like their neckcloth.”“why, you don’t like camden’s, then,” said miss winifr, in someanxieti.“ye, i do,” said mari. “i don’t like the other clergymen’s neckcloth,becaus it is thei who wear them.”“how veri puzzl!” said miss nobl, feel that her own intellectwa probabl defici.“my dear, you ar joke. you would have better reason than these forslight so respect a class of men,” said mr. farebroth,majest.“miss garth ha such sever notion of what peopl should be that it isdifficult to satisfi her,” said fred.“well, i am glad at least that she make an except in favor of myson,” said the old ladi.mari wa wonder at fred’s piqu tone, when mr. farebroth came inand had to hear the new about the engag under mr. garth. at theend he said with quiet satisfact, “_that_ is right;” and then bentto look at mari’s label and prais her handwrit. fred felt horriblyjeal—wa glad, of cours, that mr. farebroth wa so estim, butwish that he had been ugli and fat as men at forti sometim ar. itwa clear what the end would be, sinc mari openli place farebrotherabov everybodi, and these women were all evid encourag theaffair. he wa feel sure that he should have no chanc of speakingto mari, when mr. farebroth said—“fred, help me to carri these drawer back into my studi—you have neverseen my fine new studi. prai come too, miss garth. i want you to see astupend spider i found thi morn.”mari at onc saw the vicar’s intent. he had never sinc thememor even deviat from hi old pastor kind toward her,and her momentari wonder and doubt had quit gone to sleep. mari wasaccustom to think rather rigor of what wa probabl, and if abelief flatter her vaniti she felt warn to dismiss it asridicul, have earli had much exercis in such dismiss. it wasa she had foreseen: when fred had been ask to admir the fit ofth studi, and she had been ask to admir the spider, mr. farebrothersaid—“wait here a minut or two. i am go to look out an engrav whichfr is tall enough to hang for me. i shall be back in a few minut.”and then he went out. nevertheless, the first word fred said to marywa—“it is of no us, whatev i do, mari. you ar sure to marryfarebroth at last.” there wa some rage in hi tone.“what do you mean, fred?” mari exclaim indignantli, blush deepli,and surpris out of all her readi in repli.“it is imposs that you should not see it all clearli enough—you whose everyth.”“i onli see that you ar behav veri ill, fred, in speak so of mr.farebroth after he ha plead your caus in everi wai. how can youhav taken up such an idea?”fred wa rather deep, in spite of hi irrit. if mari had reallybeen unsuspici, there wa no good in tell her what mr. garth hadsaid.“it follow as a matter of cours,” he repli. “when you arecontinu see a man who beat me in everyth, and whom you setup abov everybodi, i can have no fair chanc.”“you ar veri ungrat, fred,” said mari. “i wish i had never toldmr. farebroth that i care for you in the least.”“no, i am not ungrat; i should be the happiest fellow in the worldif it were not for thi. i told your father everyth, and he wa verykind; he treat me as if i were hi son. i could go at the work with awil, write and everyth, if it were not for thi.”“for thi? for what?” said mari, imagin now that someth specificmust have been said or done.“thi dread certainti that i shall be bowl out by farebroth.”mari wa appeas by her inclin to laugh.“fred,” she said, peep round to catch hi ey, which were sulkilyturn awai from her, “you ar too delightfulli ridicul. if you werenot such a charm simpleton, what a temptat thi would be to playth wick coquett, and let you suppos that somebodi besid you hasmad love to me.”“do you realli like me best, mari?” said fred, turn ey full ofaffect on her, and try to take her hand.“i don’t like you at all at thi moment,” said mari, retreat, andput her hand behind her. “i onli said that no mortal ever madelov to me besid you. and that is no argument that a veri wise manev will,” she end, merrili.“i wish you would tell me that you could not possibl ever think ofhim,” said fred.“never dare to mention thi ani more to me, fred,” said mari, gettingseri again. “i don’t know whether it is more stupid or ungener inyou not to see that mr. farebroth ha left us togeth on purposethat we might speak freeli. i am disappoint that you should be soblind to hi delic feel.”there wa no time to sai ani more befor mr. farebroth came back withth engrav; and fred had to return to the draw-room still with ajeal dread in hi heart, but yet with comfort argument frommari’s word and manner. the result of the convers wa on thewhol more pain to mari: inevit her attent had taken a newattitud, and she saw the possibl of new interpret. she wasin a posit in which she seem to herself to be slight mr.farebroth, and thi, in relat to a man who is much honor, isalwai danger to the firm of a grate woman. to have a reasonfor go home the next dai wa a relief, for mari earnestli desir tobe alwai clear that she love fred best. when a tender affect hasbeen store itself in us through mani of our year, the idea that wecould accept ani exchang for it seem to be a cheapen of our live.and we can set a watch over our affect and our constanc as we canov other treasur.“fred ha lost all hi other expect; he must keep thi,” marysaid to herself, with a smile curl her lip. it wa imposs tohelp fleet vision of anoth kind—new digniti and an acknowledgedvalu of which she had often felt the absenc. but these thing withfr outsid them, fred forsaken and look sad for the want of her,could never tempt her deliber thought.chapter lviii.“for there can live no hatr in thine ey,therefor in that i cannot know thy chang:in mani’s look the fals heart’s historyi writ in mood and frown and wrinkl strang:but heaven in thy creation did decreethat in thy face sweet love should ever dwell:whate’er thy thought or thy heart’s work bethi look should noth thenc but sweet tell.”—shakespear: _sonnet_.at the time when mr. vinci utter that presenti about rosamond,she herself had never had the idea that she should be driven to maketh sort of appeal which he foresaw. she had not yet had ani anxietyabout wai and mean, although her domest life had been expens aswel as event. her babi had been born prematur, and all theembroid robe and cap had to be laid by in dark. thismisfortun wa attribut entir to her have persist in go outon horseback on dai when her husband had desir her not to do so; butit must not be suppos that she had shown temper on the occas, orrud told him that she would do as she like.what led her particularli to desir hors-exercis wa a visit fromcaptain lydgat, the baronet’s third son, who, i am sorri to sai, wasdetest by our tertiu of that name as a vapid fop “part hi hairfrom brow to nape in a despic fashion” (not follow by tertiushimself), and show an ignor secur that he knew the properth to sai on everi topic. lydgat inwardli curs hi own folli thath had drawn down thi visit by consent to go to hi uncl’s on thewed-tour, and he made himself rather disagre to rosamond bysai so in privat. for to rosamond thi visit wa a sourc ofunpreced but gracefulli conceal exult. she wa so intenselyconsci of have a cousin who wa a baronet’s son stai in thehous, that she imagin the knowledg of what wa impli by hispres to be diffus through all other mind; and when sheintroduc captain lydgat to her guest, she had a placid sens thathi rank penetr them as if it had been an odor. the satisfactionwa enough for the time to melt awai some disappoint in thecondit of marriag with a medic man even of good birth: it seemednow that her marriag wa visibl as well as ideal float her aboveth middlemarch level, and the futur look bright with letter andvisit to and from quallingham, and vagu advanc in consequencefor tertiu. especi as, probabl at the captain’s suggest, hismarri sister, mr. mengan, had come with her maid, and stai twonight on her wai from town. henc it wa clearli worth while forrosamond to take pain with her music and the care select of herlac.as to captain lydgat himself, hi low brow, hi aquilin nose bent onon side, and hi rather heavi utter, might have beendisadvantag in ani young gentleman who had not a militari bearingand mustach to give him what is dote on by some flower-like blondhead as “style.” he had, moreov, that sort of high-breed whichconsist in be free from the petti solicitud of middl-classgentil, and he wa a great critic of feminin charm. rosamonddelight in hi admir now even more than she had done atquallingham, and he found it easi to spend sever hour of the dai inflirt with her. the visit altogeth wa on of the pleasantestlark he had ever had, not the less so perhap becaus he suspectedthat hi queer cousin tertiu wish him awai: though lydgat, whowould rather (hyperbol speak) have di than have fail inpolit hospit, suppress hi dislik, and onli pretendedgener not to hear what the gallant offic said, consign thetask of answer him to rosamond. for he wa not at all a jealoushusband, and prefer leav a feather-head young gentleman alonewith hi wife to bear him compani.“i wish you would talk more to the captain at dinner, tertiu,” saidrosamond, on even when the import guest wa gone to loamford tose some brother offic station there. “you realli look so absentsometim—you seem to be see through hi head into someth behindit, instead of look at him.”“my dear rosi, you don’t expect me to talk much to such a conceit assa that, i hope,” said lydgat, brusqu. “if he got hi head broken,i might look at it with interest, not befor.”“i cannot conceiv why you should speak of your cousin socontemptu,” said rosamond, her finger move at her work whilesh spoke with a mild graviti which had a touch of disdain in it.“ask ladislaw if he doesn’t think your captain the greatest bore heever met with. ladislaw ha almost forsaken the hous sinc he came.”rosamond thought she knew perfectli well why mr. ladislaw dislik thecaptain: he wa jealou, and she like hi be jealou.“it is imposs to sai what will suit eccentr person,” sheanswer, “but in my opinion captain lydgat is a thorough gentleman,and i think you ought not, out of respect to sir godwin, to treat himwith neglect.”“no, dear; but we have had dinner for him. and he come in and goesout as he like. he doesn’t want me.”“still, when he is in the room, you might show him more attent. hemai not be a phoenix of clever in your sens; hi profess isdiffer; but it would be all the better for you to talk a littl onhi subject. _i_ think hi convers is quit agreeabl. and he isanyth but an unprincipl man.”“the fact is, you would wish me to be a littl more like him, rosi,”said lydgat, in a sort of resign murmur, with a smile which wa notexactli tender, and certainli not merri. rosamond wa silent and didnot smile again; but the love curv of her face look good-temperedenough without smile.those word of lydgat’s were like a sad mileston mark how far hehad travel from hi old dreamland, in which rosamond vinci appearedto be that perfect piec of womanhood who would rever her husband’smind after the fashion of an accomplish mermaid, us her comb andlook-glass and sing her song for the relax of hi adoredwisdom alon. he had begun to distinguish between that imaginedador and the attract toward a man’s talent becaus it giveshim prestig, and is like an order in hi button-hole or an honorablebefor hi name.it might have been suppos that rosamond had travel too, sinc shehad found the pointless convers of mr. ned plymdal perfectlywearisom; but to most mortal there is a stupid which isunendur and a stupid which is altogeth accept—els,inde, what would becom of social bond? captain lydgat’s stupiditywa delic scent, carri itself with “style,” talk with a goodacc, and wa close relat to sir godwin. rosamond found it quiteagre and caught mani of it phrase.therefor sinc rosamond, as we know, wa fond of horseback, there wereplenti of reason why she should be tempt to resum her ride whencaptain lydgat, who had order hi man with two hors to follow himand put up at the “green dragon,” beg her to go out on the graywhich he warrant to be gentl and train to carri a ladi—inde, hehad bought it for hi sister, and wa take it to quallingham.rosamond went out the first time without tell her husband, and cameback befor hi return; but the ride had been so thorough a success,and she declar herself so much the better in consequ, that he wasinform of it with full relianc on hi consent that she should gorid again.on the contrari lydgat wa more than hurt—he wa utterli confoundedthat she had risk herself on a strang hors without refer thematt to hi wish. after the first almost thunder exclam ofastonish, which suffici warn rosamond of what wa come, hewa silent for some moment.“howev, you have come back safe,” he said, at last, in a decisiveton. “you will not go again, rosi; that is understood. if it were thequietest, most familiar hors in the world, there would alwai be thechanc of accid. and you know veri well that i wish you to give uprid the roan on that account.”“but there is the chanc of accid indoor, tertiu.”“my darl, don’t talk nonsens,” said lydgat, in an implor tone;“sure i am the person to judg for you. i think it is enough that isai you ar not to go again.”rosamond wa arrang her hair befor dinner, and the reflect ofher head in the glass show no chang in it loveli except alittl turn asid of the long neck. lydgat had been move aboutwith hi hand in hi pocket, and now paus near her, as if heawait some assur.“i wish you would fasten up my plait, dear,” said rosamond, lettingh arm fall with a littl sigh, so as to make a husband asham ofstand there like a brute. lydgat had often fasten the plaitsbefor, be among the deftest of men with hi larg fine formedfing. he swept up the soft festoon of plait and fasten in thetal comb (to such us do men come!); and what could he do then butkiss the exquisit nape which wa shown in all it delic curv? butwhen we do what we have done befor, it is often with a differ.lydgat wa still angri, and had not forgotten hi point.“i shall tell the captain that he ought to have known better than offery hi hors,” he said, as he move awai.“i beg you will not do anyth of the kind, tertiu,” said rosamond,look at him with someth more mark than usual in her speech. “itwil be treat me as if i were a child. promis that you will leaveth subject to me.”there did seem to be some truth in her object. lydgat said, “verywel,” with a surli obedi, and thu the discuss end with hispromis rosamond, and not with her promis him.in fact, she had been determin not to promis. rosamond had thatvictori obstinaci which never wast it energi in impetuousresist. what she like to do wa to her the right thing, and allher clever wa direct to get the mean of do it. she meantto go out ride again on the grai, and she did go on the nextopportun of her husband’s absenc, not intend that he should knowuntil it wa late enough not to signifi to her. the temptat wascertainli great: she wa veri fond of the exercis, and thegratif of ride on a fine hors, with captain lydgat, sirgodwin’s son, on anoth fine hors by her side, and of be met inthi posit by ani on but her husband, wa someth as good as herdream befor marriag: moreov she wa rivet the connect withth famili at quallingham, which must be a wise thing to do.but the gentl grai, unprepar for the crash of a tree that wa beingfel on the edg of halsel wood, took fright, and caus a worsefright to rosamond, lead final to the loss of her babi. lydgatecould not show hi anger toward her, but he wa rather bearish to thecaptain, whose visit natur soon came to an end.in all futur convers on the subject, rosamond wa mildli certainthat the ride had made no differ, and that if she had stai athom the same symptom would have come on and would have end in thesam wai, becaus she had felt someth like them befor.lydgat could onli sai, “poor, poor darl!”—but he secretli wonderedov the terribl tenac of thi mild creatur. there wa gatheringwithin him an amaz sens of hi powerless over rosamond. hissuperior knowledg and mental forc, instead of be, as he hadimagin, a shrine to consult on all occas, wa simpli set asid oneveri practic question. he had regard rosamond’s clever asprecis of the recept kind which becam a woman. he wa nowbegin to find out what that clever wa—what wa the shape intowhich it had run as into a close network aloof and independ. no onequick than rosamond to see caus and effect which lai within thetrack of her own tast and interest: she had seen clearli lydgat’spreemin in middlemarch societi, and could go on imaginativelytrac still more agreeabl social effect when hi talent should haveadvanc him; but for her, hi profession and scientif ambit hadno other relat to these desir effect than if thei had been thefortun discoveri of an ill-smell oil. and that oil apart, withwhich she had noth to do, of cours she believ in her own opinionmor than she did in hi. lydgat wa astound to find in numberlesstrifl matter, as well as in thi last seriou case of the ride,that affect did not make her compliant. he had no doubt that theaffect wa there, and had no presenti that he had done anythingto repel it. for hi own part he said to himself that he love her astenderli as ever, and could make up hi mind to her negat;but—well! lydgat wa much worri, and consciou of new element inhi life as noxiou to him as an inlet of mud to a creatur that hasbeen us to breath and bath and dart after it illumin prei inth clearest of water.rosamond wa soon look loveli than ever at her worktabl, enjoyingdr in her father’s phaeton and think it like that she might beinvit to quallingham. she knew that she wa a much more exquisiteorna to the draw-room there than ani daughter of the famili, andin reflect that the gentlemen were awar of that, did not perhapssuffici consid whether the ladi would be eager to seethemselv surpass.lydgat, reliev from anxieti about her, relaps into what sheinwardli call hi moodi—a name which to her cover histhought preoccup with other subject than herself, as well asthat uneasi look of the brow and distast for all ordinari thing as ifthei were mix with bitter herb, which realli made a sort ofweath-glass to hi vexat and forebod. these latter state ofmind had on caus amongst other, which he had gener butmistakenli avoid mention to rosamond, lest it should affect herhealth and spirit. between him and her inde there wa that totalmiss of each other’s mental track, which is too evid possibleeven between person who ar continu think of each other. tolydg it seem that he had been spend month after month insacrif more than half of hi best intent and best power to histend for rosamond; bear her littl claim and interruptionswithout impati, and, abov all, bear without betray ofbitt to look through less and less of interf illus at theblank unreflect surfac her mind present to hi ardor for the moreimperson end of hi profess and hi scientif studi, an ardorwhich he had fanci that the ideal wife must somehow worship assublim, though not in the least know why. but hi endur wasmingl with a self-discont which, if we know how to be candid, weshal confess to make more than half our bitter under grievanc,wife or husband includ. it alwai remain true that if we had beengreat, circumst would have been less strong against us. lydgatewa awar that hi concess to rosamond were often littl more thanth laps of slacken resolut, the creep paralysi apt to seizean enthusiasm which is out of adjust to a constant portion of ourliv. and on lydgat’s enthusiasm there wa constantli press not asimpl weight of sorrow, but the bite presenc of a petti degradingcar, such as cast the blight of ironi over all higher effort.thi wa the care which he had hitherto abstain from mention torosamond; and he believ, with some wonder, that it had never enteredh mind, though certainli no difficulti could be less mysteri. itwa an infer with a conspicu handl to it, and had been easilydrawn by indiffer observ, that lydgat wa in debt; and he couldnot succe in keep out of hi mind for long togeth that he waseveri dai get deeper into that swamp, which tempt men toward itwith such a pretti cover of flower and verdur. it is wonder howsoon a man get up to hi chin there—in a condit in which, in spiteof himself, he is forc to think chiefli of releas, though he had aschem of the univers in hi soul.eighteen month ago lydgat wa poor, but had never known the eagerw of small sum, and felt rather a burn contempt for ani on whodescend a step in order to gain them. he wa now experiencingsometh wors than a simpl deficit: he wa assail by the vulgarh trial of a man who ha bought and us a great mani thingswhich might have been done without, and which he is unabl to pai for,though the demand for payment ha becom press.how thi came about mai be easili seen without much arithmet orknowledg of price. when a man in set up a hous and prepar formarriag find that hi furnitur and other initi expens come tobetween four and five hundr pound more than he ha capit to payfor; when at the end of a year it appear that hi household expens,hors and et caetera, amount to nearli a thousand, while the proceedsof the practic reckon from the old book to be worth eight hundredp annum have sunk like a summer pond and make hardli five hundr,chiefli in unpaid entri, the plain infer is that, whether hemind it or not, he is in debt. those were less expens time thanour own, and provinci life wa compar modest; but the easewith which a medic man who had late bought a practic, who thoughtthat he wa oblig to keep two hors, whose tabl wa suppliedwithout stint, and who paid an insur on hi life and a high rentfor hous and garden, might find hi expens doubl hi receipt,can be conceiv by ani on who doe not think these detail beneathhi consider. rosamond, accustom from her childhood to anextravag household, thought that good housekeep consist simplyin order the best of everyth—noth els “answer;” and lydgatesuppos that “if thing were done at all, thei must be doneproperli”—he did not see how thei were to live otherwis. if each headof household expenditur had been mention to him beforehand, he wouldhav probabl observ that “it could hardli come to much,” and if anyon had suggest a save on a particular articl—for exampl, thesubstitut of cheap fish for dear—it would have appear to himsimpli a penni-wise, mean notion. rosamond, even without such anoccas as captain lydgat’s visit, wa fond of give invit,and lydgat, though he often thought the guest tiresom, did notinterfer. thi sociabl seem a necessari part of professionalprud, and the entertain must be suitabl. it is true lydgatewa constantli visit the home of the poor and adjust hisprescript of diet to their small mean; but, dear me! ha it not bythi time ceas to be remark—is it not rather that we expect inmen, that thei should have numer strand of experi ly side bysid and never compar them with each other? expenditur—like uglinessand error—becom a total new thing when we attach our ownperson to it, and measur it by that wide differ which ismanifest (in our own sensat) between ourselv and other. lydgatebeliev himself to be careless about hi dress, and he despis a manwho calcul the effect of hi costum; it seem to him onli amatt of cours that he had abund of fresh garment—such thingswer natur order in sheav. it must be rememb that he hadnev hitherto felt the check of importun debt, and he walk byhabit, not by self-critic. but the check had come.it novelti made it the more irrit. he wa amaz, disgust thatcondit so foreign to all hi purpos, so hatefulli disconnectedwith the object he care to occupi himself with, should have lain inambush and clutch him when he wa unawar. and there wa not onli theactual debt; there wa the certainti that in hi present posit hemust go on deepen it. two furnish tradesmen at brass, whosebil had been incur befor hi marriag, and whom uncalculatedcurr expens had ever sinc prevent him from pai, hadrepeatedli sent him unpleas letter which had forc themselv onhi attent. thi could hardli have been more gall to anydisposit than to lydgat’s, with hi intens pride—hi dislik ofask a favor or be under an oblig to ani on. he had scornedeven to form conjectur about mr. vinci’s intent on monei matter,and noth but extrem could have induc him to appli to hisfath-in-law, even if he had not been made awar in variou indirectwai sinc hi marriag that mr. vinci’s own affair were notflourish, and that the expect of help from him would beres. some men easili trust in the readi of friend; it hadnev in the former part of hi life occur to lydgat that he shouldne to do so: he had never thought what borrow would be to him; butnow that the idea had enter hi mind, he felt that he would ratherincur ani other hardship. in the mean time he had no monei or prospectsof monei; and hi practic wa not get more lucr.no wonder that lydgat had been unabl to suppress all sign of inwardtroubl dure the last few month, and now that rosamond wa regainingbrilli health, he medit take her entir into confid onhi difficulti. new convers with tradesmen’s bill had forc hisreason into a new channel of comparison: he had begun to considerfrom a new point of view what wa necessari and unnecessari in goodsord, and to see that there must be some chang of habit. how couldsuch a chang be made without rosamond’s concurr? the immediateoccas of open the disagre fact to her wa forc upon him.have no monei, and have privat sought advic as to what securitycould possibl be given by a man in hi posit, lydgat had offeredth on good secur in hi power to the less peremptori creditor, whowa a silversmith and jewel, and who consent to take on himselfth upholster’s credit also, accept interest for a given term. thesecur necessari wa a bill of sale on the furnitur of hi hous,which might make a creditor easi for a reason time about a debtamount to less than four hundr pound; and the silversmith, mr.dover, wa will to reduc it by take back a portion of the plateand ani other articl which wa as good as new. “ani other articl” wasa phrase delic impli jewelleri, and more particularli somepurpl amethyst cost thirti pound, which lydgat had bought as abrid present.opinion mai be divid as to hi wisdom in make thi present: somemai think that it wa a grace attent to be expect from a manlik lydgat, and that the fault of ani troublesom consequ lai inth pinch narrow of provinci life at that time, which offeredno conveni for profession peopl whose fortun wa notproport to their tast; also, in lydgat’s ridiculousfastidi about ask hi friend for monei.howev, it had seem a question of no moment to him on that finemorn when he went to give a final order for plate: in the presenceof other jewel enorm expens, and as an addit to order ofwhich the amount had not been exactli calcul, thirti pound fororna so exquisit suit to rosamond’s neck and arm couldhardli appear excess when there wa no readi cash for it to exce.but at thi crisi lydgat’s imagin could not help dwell on theposs of let the amethyst take their place again among mr.dover’s stock, though he shrank from the idea of propos thi torosamond. have been rous to discern consequ which he had neverbeen in the habit of trace, he wa prepar to act on thisdiscern with some of the rigor (by no mean all) that he would haveappli in pursu experi. he wa nerv himself to thi rigor ash rode from brass, and medit on the represent he mustmak to rosamond.it wa even when he got home. he wa intens miser, thisstrong man of nine-and-twenti and of mani gift. he wa not sayingangrili within himself that he had made a profound mistak; but themistak wa at work in him like a recogn chronic diseas, minglingit uneasi importun with everi prospect, and enfeebl everythought. as he went along the passag to the draw-room, he heard thepiano and sing. of cours, ladislaw wa there. it wa some weekssinc will had part from dorothea, yet he wa still at the old postin middlemarch. lydgat had no object in gener to ladislaw’scome, but just now he wa annoi that he could not find hi hearthfre. when he open the door the two singer went on toward thekei-note, rais their ey and look at him inde, but notregard hi entranc as an interrupt. to a man gall with hishar as poor lydgat wa, it is not sooth to see two peoplewarbl at him, as he come in with the sens that the pain dai hasstil pain in store. hi face, alreadi paler than usual, took on ascowl as he walk across the room and flung himself into a chair.the singer feel themselv excus by the fact that thei had onlythre bar to sing, now turn round.“how ar you, lydgat?” said will, come forward to shake hand.lydgat took hi hand, but did not think it necessari to speak.“have you dine, tertiu? i expect you much earlier,” said rosamond,who had alreadi seen that her husband wa in a “horribl humor.” sheseat herself in her usual place as she spoke.“i have dine. i should like some tea, pleas,” said lydgat, curtli,still scowl and look markedli at hi leg stretch out beforehim.will wa too quick to need more. “i shall be off,” he said, reachinghi hat.“tea is come,” said rosamond; “prai don’t go.”“ye, lydgat is bore,” said will, who had more comprehens oflydg than rosamond had, and wa not offend by hi manner, easilyimagin outdoor caus of annoy.“there is the more need for you to stai,” said rosamond, playfulli, andin her lightest accent; “he will not speak to me all the even.”“ye, rosamond, i shall,” said lydgat, in hi strong bariton. “i havesom seriou busi to speak to you about.”no introduct of the busi could have been less like that whichlydg had intend; but her indiffer manner had been tooprovok.“there! you see,” said will. “i’m go to the meet about themechan’ institut. good-by;” and he went quickli out of the room.rosamond did not look at her husband, but present rose and took herplac befor the tea-trai. she wa think that she had never seen himso disagre. lydgat turn hi dark ey on her and watch her assh delic handl the tea-servic with her taper finger, andlook at the object immedi befor her with no curv in her facedisturb, and yet with an ineff protest in her air against allpeopl with unpleas manner. for the moment he lost the sens of hiswound in a sudden specul about thi new form of feminineimpass reveal itself in the sylph-like frame which he hadonc interpret as the sign of a readi intellig sensit. hismind glanc back to laur while he look at rosamond, he saidinwardli, “would _she_ kill me becaus i weari her?” and then, “it isth wai with all women.” but thi power of gener which give menso much the superior in mistak over the dumb anim, wasimmedi thwart by lydgat’s memori of wonder impress fromth behavior of anoth woman—from dorothea’s look and tone ofemot about her husband when lydgat began to attend him—from herpassion cry to be taught what would best comfort that man for whosesak it seem as if she must quell everi impuls in her except theyearn of faith and compass. these reviv impressionssucceed each other quickli and dreamili in lydgat’s mind while thetea wa be brew. he had shut hi ey in the last instant ofreveri while he heard dorothea sai, “advis me—think what i cando—he ha been all hi life labor and look forward. he mindsabout noth els—and i mind about noth els.”that voic of deep-soul womanhood had remain within him as theenkindl concept of dead and sceptr geniu had remain withinhim (is there not a geniu for feel nobli which also reign overhuman spirit and their conclus?); the tone were a music fromwhich he wa fall awai—he had realli fallen into a momentari doze,when rosamond said in her silveri neutral wai, “here is your tea,tertiu,” set it on the small tabl by hi side, and then movedback to her place without look at him. lydgat wa too hasti inattribut insens to her; after her own fashion, she wassensit enough, and took last impress. her impress now wason of offenc and repuls. but then, rosamond had no scowl and hadnev rais her voic: she wa quit sure that no on could justlyfind fault with her.perhap lydgat and she had never felt so far off each other befor;but there were strong reason for not defer hi revel, even ifh had not alreadi begun it by that abrupt announc; inde some ofth angri desir to rous her into more sensibl on hi accountwhich had prompt him to speak prematur, still mingl with hispain in the prospect of her pain. but he wait till the trai wa gone,the candl were lit, and the even quiet might be count on: theinterv had left time for repel tender to return into the oldcours. he spoke kindli.“dear rosi, lai down your work and come to sit by me,” he said, gentli,push awai the tabl, and stretch out hi arm to draw a chair nearhi own.rosamond obei. as she came toward him in her draperi of transparentfaintli tint muslin, her slim yet round figur never look moregrac; as she sat down by him and laid on hand on the elbow of hischair, at last look at him and meet hi ey, her delic neckand cheek and pure cut lip never had more of that untarnish beautywhich touch as in spring-time and infanc and all sweet fresh. ittouch lydgat now, and mingl the earli moment of hi love for herwith all the other memori which were stir in thi crisi of deeptroubl. he laid hi ampl hand softli on her, sai—“dear!” with the linger utter which affect give to the word.rosamond too wa still under the power of that same past, and herhusband wa still in part the lydgat whose approv had stirreddelight. she put hi hair lightli awai from hi forehead, then laid heroth hand on hi, and wa consciou of forgiv him.“i am oblig to tell you what will hurt you, rosi. but there areth which husband and wife must think of togeth. i dare sai it hasoccur to you alreadi that i am short of monei.”lydgat paus; but rosamond turn her neck and look at a vase onth mantel-piec.“i wa not abl to pai for all the thing we had to get befor we weremarri, and there have been expens sinc which i have been obligedto meet. the consequ is, there is a larg debt at brass—threehundr and eighti pound—which ha been press on me a good while,and in fact we ar get deeper everi dai, for peopl don’t pai meth faster becaus other want the monei. i took pain to keep it fromyou while you were not well; but now we must think togeth about it,and you must help me.”“what can _i_ do, tertiu?” said rosamond, turn her ey on himagain. that littl speech of four word, like so mani other in alllanguag, is capabl by vari vocal inflect of express allstat of mind from helpless dim to exhaust argumentativepercept, from the completest self-devot fellowship to the mostneutr aloof. rosamond’s thin utter threw into the word “whatcan—i—do!” as much neutral as thei could hold. thei fell like amort chill on lydgat’s rous tender. he did not storm inindign—he felt too sad a sink of the heart. and when he spokeagain it wa more in the tone of a man who forc himself to fulfil atask.“it is necessari for you to know, becaus i have to give secur for atim, and a man must come to make an inventori of the furnitur.”rosamond color deepli. “have you not ask papa for monei?” she said,as soon as she could speak.“no.”“then i must ask him!” she said, releas her hand from lydgat’s,and rise to stand at two yard’ distanc from him.“no, rosi,” said lydgat, decis. “it is too late to do that. theinventori will be begun to-morrow. rememb it is a mere secur: itwil make no differ: it is a temporari affair. i insist upon itthat your father shall not know, unless i choos to tell him,” addedlydg, with a more peremptori emphasi.thi certainli wa unkind, but rosamond had thrown him back on evilexpect as to what she would do in the wai of quiet steadydisobedi. the unkind seem unpardon to her: she wa notgiven to weep and dislik it, but now her chin and lip began totrembl and the tear well up. perhap it wa not possibl forlydg, under the doubl stress of outward materi difficulti and ofhi own proud resist to humili consequ, to imagin fullywhat thi sudden trial wa to a young creatur who had known nothingbut indulg, and whose dream had all been of new indulg, moreexactli to her tast. but he did wish to spare her as much as he could,and her tear cut him to the heart. he could not speak againimmedi; but rosamond did not go on sob: she tri to conquerh agit and wipe awai her tear, continu to look befor herat the mantel-piec.“try not to griev, darl,” said lydgat, turn hi ey up towardsh. that she had chosen to move awai from him in thi moment of hertroubl made everyth harder to sai, but he must absolut go on.“we must brace ourselv to do what is necessari. it is i who have beenin fault: i ought to have seen that i could not afford to live in thiswai. but mani thing have told against me in my practic, and it reallyjust now ha eb to a low point. i mai recov it, but in the meantim we must pull up—we must chang our wai of live. we shall weatherit. when i have given thi secur i shall have time to look about me;and you ar so clever that if you turn your mind to manag you willschool me into care. i have been a thoughtless rascal aboutsquar price—but come, dear, sit down and forgiv me.”lydgat wa bow hi neck under the yoke like a creatur who hadtalon, but who had reason too, which often reduc us to meek.when he had spoken the last word in an implor tone, rosamondreturn to the chair by hi side. hi self-blame gave her some hopethat he would attend to her opinion, and she said—“why can you not put off have the inventori made? you can send themen awai to-morrow when thei come.”“i shall not send them awai,” said lydgat, the peremptori risingagain. wa it of ani us to explain?“if we left middlemarch? there would of cours be a sale, and thatwould do as well.”“but we ar not go to leav middlemarch.”“i am sure, tertiu, it would be much better to do so. why can we notgo to london? or near durham, where your famili is known?”“we can go nowher without monei, rosamond.”“your friend would not wish you to be without monei. and sure theseodi tradesmen might be made to understand that, and to wait, if youwould make proper represent to them.”“thi is idl rosamond,” said lydgat, angrili. “you must learn to takemi judgment on question you don’t understand. i have made necessaryarrang, and thei must be carri out. as to friend, i have noexpect whatev from them, and shall not ask them for anyth.”rosamond sat perfectli still. the thought in her mind wa that if shehad known how lydgat would behav, she would never have marri him.“we have no time to wast now on unnecessari word, dear,” saidlydg, try to be gentl again. “there ar some detail that i wantto consid with you. dover sai he will take a good deal of the plateback again, and ani of the jewelleri we like. he realli behav verywel.”“ar we to go without spoon and fork then?” said rosamond, whose verylip seem to get thinner with the thin of her utter. she wasdetermin to make no further resist or suggest.“oh no, dear!” said lydgat. “but look here,” he continu, draw apap from hi pocket and open it; “here is dover’s account. see, ihav mark a number of articl, which if we return them wouldreduc the amount by thirti pound and more. i have not mark ani ofth jewelleri.” lydgat had realli felt thi point of the jewelleryveri bitter to himself; but he had overcom the feel by severeargu. he could not propos to rosamond that she should return anyparticular present of hi, but he had told himself that he wa bound toput dover’s offer befor her, and her inward prompt might make theaffair easi.“it is useless for me to look, tertiu,” said rosamond, calmli; “youwil return what you pleas.” she would not turn her ey on the paper,and lydgat, flush up to the root of hi hair, drew it back and letit fall on hi knee. meanwhil rosamond quietli went out of the room,leav lydgat helpless and wonder. wa she not come back? itseem that she had no more identifi herself with him than if theyhad been creatur of differ speci and oppos interest. hetoss hi head and thrust hi hand deep into hi pocket with a sortof vengeanc. there wa still scienc—there were still good object towork for. he must give a tug still—all the stronger becaus othersatisfact were go.but the door open and rosamond re-enter. she carri the leatherbox contain the amethyst, and a tini ornament basket whichcontain other box, and lai them on the chair where she had beensit, she said, with perfect proprieti in her air—“thi is all the jewelleri you ever gave me. you can return what youlik of it, and of the plate also. you will not, of cours, expect meto stai at home to-morrow. i shall go to papa’s.”to mani women the look lydgat cast at her would have been moreterr than on of anger: it had in it a despair accept of thedist she wa place between them.“and when shall you come back again?” he said, with a bitter edg onhi accent.“oh, in the even. of cours i shall not mention the subject tomamma.” rosamond wa convinc that no woman could behav moreirreproach than she wa behav; and she went to sit down at herwork-tabl. lydgat sat medit a minut or two, and the result wasthat he said, with some of the old emot in hi tone—“now we have been unit, rosi, you should not leav me to myself inth first troubl that ha come.”“certainli not,” said rosamond; “i shall do everyth it becom me todo.”“it is not right that the thing should be left to servant, or that ishould have to speak to them about it. and i shall be oblig to goout—i don’t know how earli. i understand your shrink from thehumili of these monei affair. but, my dear rosamond, as aquest of pride, which i feel just as much as you can, it is surelybett to manag the thing ourselv, and let the servant see aslittl of it as possibl; and sinc you ar my wife, there is nohind your share in my disgrac—if there were disgrac.”rosamond did not answer immedi, but at last she said, “veri well,i will stai at home.”“i shall not touch these jewel, rosi. take them awai again. but i willwrit out a list of plate that we mai return, and that can be pack upand sent at onc.”“the servant will know _that_,” said rosamond, with the slightesttouch of sarcasm.“well, we must meet some disagre as necess. where is theink, i wonder?” said lydgat, rise, and throw the account on thelarg tabl where he meant to write.rosamond went to reach the inkstand, and after set it on the tablewa go to turn awai, when lydgat, who wa stand close by, puthi arm round her and drew her toward him, sai—“come, darl, let us make the best of thing. it will onli be for atim, i hope, that we shall have to be stingi and particular. kiss me.”hi nativ warm-hearted took a great deal of quench, and it is apart of manli for a husband to feel keenli the fact that aninexperienc girl ha got into troubl by marri him. she receivedhi kiss and return it faintli, and in thi wai an appear ofaccord wa recov for the time. but lydgat could not help lookingforward with dread to the inevit futur discuss aboutexpenditur and the necess for a complet chang in their wai ofliv.chapter lix.“thei said of old the soul had human shape,but smaller, subtler than the fleshli self,so wander forth for air when it pleas.and see! besid her cherub-face there floatsa pale-lip form aerial whisperingit prompt in that littl shell her ear.”new is often dispers as thoughtlessli and effect as that pollenwhich the bee carri off (have no idea how powderi thei ar) whenthei ar buzz in search of their particular nectar. thi finecomparison ha refer to fred vinci, who on that even at lowickparsonag heard a live discuss among the ladi on the new whichtheir old servant had got from tantripp concern mr. casaubon’sstrang mention of mr. ladislaw in a codicil to hi will made not longbefor hi death. miss winifr wa astound to find that her brotherhad known the fact befor, and observ that camden wa the mostwond man for know thing and not tell them; whereupon marygarth said that the codicil had perhap got mix up with the habit ofspid, which miss winifr never would listen to. mr. farebrotherconsid that the new had someth to do with their have onlyonc seen mr. ladislaw at lowick, and miss nobl made mani smallcompassion mew.fred knew littl and care less about ladislaw and the casaubon, andhi mind never recur to that discuss till on dai call onrosamond at hi mother’s request to deliv a messag as he pass, hehappen to see ladislaw go awai. fred and rosamond had littl tosai to each other now that marriag had remov her from collis withth unpleas of brother, and especi now that he had takenwhat she held the stupid and even reprehens step of give up thechurch to take to such a busi as mr. garth’s. henc fred talk byprefer of what he consid indiffer new, and “a propo ofthat young ladislaw” mention what he had heard at lowick parsonag.now lydgat, like mr. farebroth, knew a great deal more than he told,and when he had onc been set think about the relat between willand dorothea hi conjectur had gone beyond the fact. he imagin thatther wa a passion attach on both side, and thi struck him asmuch too seriou to gossip about. he rememb will’s irritabilitywhen he had mention mr. casaubon, and wa the more circumspect. onth whole hi surmis, in addit to what he knew of the fact,increas hi friendli and toler toward ladislaw, and made himunderstand the vacil which kept him at middlemarch after he hadsaid that he should go awai. it wa signific of the separatenessbetween lydgat’s mind and rosamond’s that he had no impuls to speakto her on the subject; inde, he did not quit trust her reticencetoward will. and he wa right there; though he had no vision of thewai in which her mind would act in urg her to speak.when she repeat fred’s new to lydgat, he said, “take care you don’tdrop the faintest hint to ladislaw, rosi. he is like to fly out as ifyou insult him. of cours it is a pain affair.”rosamond turn her neck and pat her hair, look the imag ofplacid indiffer. but the next time will came when lydgat wa awai,she spoke archli about hi not go to london as he had threaten.“i know all about it. i have a confidenti littl bird,” said she,show veri pretti air of her head over the bit of work held highbetween her activ finger. “there is a power magnet in thisneighborhood.”“to be sure there is. nobodi know that better than you,” said will,with light gallantri, but inwardli prepar to be angri.“it is realli the most charm romanc: mr. casaubon jealou, andforese that there wa no on els whom mr. casaubon would so muchlik to marri, and no on who would so much like to marri her as acertain gentleman; and then lai a plan to spoil all by make herforfeit her properti if she did marri that gentleman—and then—andthen—and then—oh, i have no doubt the end will be thoroughli romant.”“great god! what do you mean?” said will, flush over face and ear,hi featur seem to chang as if he had had a violent shake. “don’tjoke; tell me what you mean.”“you don’t realli know?” said rosamond, no longer play, and desiringnoth better than to tell in order that she might evok effect.“no!” he return, impati.“don’t know that mr. casaubon ha left it in hi will that if mr.casaubon marri you she is to forfeit all her properti?”“how do you know that it is true?” said will, eagerli.“my brother fred heard it from the farebroth.” will start up fromhi chair and reach hi hat.“i dare sai she like you better than the properti,” said rosamond,look at him from a distanc.“prai don’t sai ani more about it,” said will, in a hoars undertoneextrem unlik hi usual light voic. “it is a foul insult to her andto me.” then he sat down absent, look befor him, but seeingnoth.“now you ar angri with _me_,” said rosamond. “it is too bad to bear_me_ malic. you ought to be oblig to me for tell you.”“so i am,” said will, abruptli, speak with that kind of doubl soulwhich belong to dreamer who answer question.“i expect to hear of the marriag,” said rosamond, playfulli.“never! you will never hear of the marriag!”with those word utter impetu, will rose, put out hi hand torosamond, still with the air of a somnambulist, and went awai.when he wa gone, rosamond left her chair and walk to the other endof the room, lean when she got there against a chiffonnier, andlook out of the window wearili. she wa oppress by ennui, and bythat dissatisfact which in women’s mind is continu turn intoa trivial jealousi, refer to no real claim, spring from nodeep passion than the vagu exacting of egoism, and yet capableof impel action as well as speech. “there realli is noth to carefor much,” said poor rosamond inwardli, think of the famili atquallingham, who did not write to her; and that perhap tertiu when hecam home would teas her about expens. she had alreadi secretlydisobei him by ask her father to help them, and he had endeddecis by sai, “i am more like to want help myself.”chapter lx.good phrase ar sure, and ever were, veri commend.—_justic shallow_.a few dai afterward—it wa alreadi the end of august—there wa anoccas which caus some excit in middlemarch: the public, if itchos, wa to have the advantag of bui, under the distinguishedauspic of mr. borthrop trumbul, the furnitur, book, and pictureswhich anybodi might see by the handbil to be the best in everi kind,belong to edwin larcher, esq. thi wa not on of the salesind the depress of trade; on the contrari, it wa due to mr.larcher’s great success in the carri busi, which warrant hispurchas of a mansion near riverston alreadi furnish in high style byan illustri spa physician—furnish inde with such larg framefulsof expens flesh-paint in the dine-room, that mr. larcher wasnerv until reassur by find the subject to be scriptur. henceth fine opportun to purchas which wa well point out in thehandbil of mr. borthrop trumbul, whose acquaint with the historyof art enabl him to state that the hall furnitur, to be sold withoutreserv, compris a piec of carv by a contemporari of gibbon.at middlemarch in those time a larg sale wa regard as a kind offestiv. there wa a tabl spread with the best cold eatabl, as at asuperior funer; and facil were offer for thatgener-drink of cheer glass which might lead to gener andcheer bid for undesir articl. mr. larcher’s sale wa themor attract in the fine weather becaus the hous stood just at theend of the town, with a garden and stabl attach, in that pleasantissu from middlemarch call the london road, which wa also the roadto the new hospit and to mr. bulstrod’s retir resid, known asth shrub. in short, the auction wa as good as a fair, and drew allclass with leisur at command: to some, who risk make bid inord simpli to rais price, it wa almost equal to bet at therac. the second dai, when the best furnitur wa to be sold,“everybodi” wa there; even mr. thesig, the rector of st. peter’s,had look in for a short time, wish to bui the carv tabl, andhad rub elbow with mr. bambridg and mr. horrock. there wa awreath of middlemarch ladi accommod with seat round the larget in the dine-room, where mr. borthrop trumbul wa mount withdesk and hammer; but the row chiefli of masculin face behind wereoften vari by incom and outgo both from the door and thelarg bow-window open on to the lawn.“everybodi” that dai did not includ mr. bulstrod, whose health couldnot well endur crowd and draught. but mr. bulstrod hadparticularli wish to have a certain pictur—a “supper at emmau,”attribut in the catalogu to guido; and at the last moment befor thedai of the sale mr. bulstrod had call at the offic of the“pioneer,” of which he wa now on of the proprietor, to beg of mr.ladislaw as a great favor that he would obligingli us hi remarkableknowledg of pictur on behalf of mr. bulstrod, and judg of thevalu of thi particular paint—“if,” ad the scrupul politebank, “attend at the sale would not interfer with thearrang for your departur, which i know is immin.”thi proviso might have sound rather satir in will’s ear if hehad been in a mood to care about such satir. it refer to anunderstand enter into mani week befor with the proprietor ofth paper, that he should be at liberti ani dai he pleas to hand overth manag to the subeditor whom he had been train; sinc hewish final to quit middlemarch. but indefinit vision of ambitionar weak against the eas of do what is habitu or beguilinglyagre; and we all know the difficulti of carri out a resolvewhen we secretli long that it mai turn out to be unnecessari. in suchstat of mind the most incredul person ha a privat leaningtoward miracl: imposs to conceiv how our wish could befulfil, still—veri wonder thing have happen! will did notconfess thi weak to himself, but he linger. what wa the us ofgo to london at that time of the year? the rugbi men who wouldrememb him were not there; and so far as polit write wasconcern, he would rather for a few week go on with the “pioneer.” atth present moment, howev, when mr. bulstrod wa speak to him, hehad both a strengthen resolv to go and an equal strong resolv notto go till he had onc more seen dorothea. henc he repli that he hadreason for defer hi departur a littl, and would be happi to goto the sale.will wa in a defiant mood, hi conscious be deepli stung withth thought that the peopl who look at him probabl knew a facttantamount to an accus against him as a fellow with low designswhich were to be frustrat by a dispos of properti. like most peoplewho assert their freedom with regard to convent distinct, hewa prepar to be sudden and quick at quarrel with ani on who mighthint that he had person reason for that assert—that there wasanyth in hi blood, hi bear, or hi charact to which he gaveth mask of an opinion. when he wa under an irrit impress ofthi kind he would go about for dai with a defiant look, the colorchang in hi transpar skin as if he were on the _qui vive_,watch for someth which he had to dart upon.thi express wa peculiarli notic in him at the sale, and thosewho had onli seen him in hi mood of gentl odditi or of brightenjoy would have been struck with a contrast. he wa not sorri tohav thi occas for appear in public befor the middlemarchtrib of toller, hackbutt, and the rest, who look down on him as anadventur, and were in a state of brutal ignor about dant—whosneer at hi polish blood, and were themselv of a breed veri muchin need of cross. he stood in a conspicu place not far from theauction, with a fore-finger in each side-pocket and hi head thrownbackward, not care to speak to anybodi, though he had been cordiallywelcom as a connoiss_ur_ by mr. trumbul, who wa enjoi theutmost activ of hi great faculti.and sure among all men whose vocat requir them to exhibit theirpow of speech, the happiest is a prosper provinci auctioneerkeenli aliv to hi own joke and sensibl of hi encyclopedicknowledg. some saturnin, sour-blood person might object to beconstantli insist on the merit of all articl from boot-jack to“berghem;” but mr. borthrop trumbul had a kindli liquid in hi vein;he wa an admir by natur, and would have like to have the universeund hi hammer, feel that it would go at a higher figur for hisrecommend.meanwhil mr. larcher’s draw-room furnitur wa enough for him.when will ladislaw had come in, a second fender, said to have beenforgotten in it right place, suddenli claim the auction’senthusiasm, which he distribut on the equit principl of praisingthos thing most which were most in need of prais. the fender wa ofpolish steel, with much lancet-shape open-work and a sharp edg.“now, ladi,” said he, “i shall appeal to you. here is a fender whichat ani other sale would hardli be offer with out reserv, be, as imai sai, for qualiti of steel and quaint of design, a kind ofth”—here mr. trumbul drop hi voic and becam slightli nasal,trim hi outlin with hi left finger—“that might not fall in withordinari tast. allow me to tell you that by-and-by thi style ofworkmanship will be the onli on in vogu—half-a-crown, you said? thankyou—go at half-a-crown, thi characterist fender; and i haveparticular inform that the antiqu style is veri much sought afterin high quarter. three shill—three-and-sixpenc—hold it well up,joseph! look, ladi, at the chastiti of the design—i have no doubtmyself that it wa turn out in the last centuri! four shill, mr.mawmsei?—four shill.”“it’s not a thing i would put in _my_ draw-room,” said mr. mawmsei,audibl, for the warn of the rash husband. “i wonder _at_ mr.larcher. everi bless child’s head that fell against it would be cutin two. the edg is like a knife.”“quit true,” rejoin mr. trumbul, quickli, “and most uncommonlyus to have a fender at hand that will cut, if you have a leathersho-tie or a bit of string that want cut and no knife at hand:mani a man ha been left hang becaus there wa no knife to cut himdown. gentlemen, here’s a fender that if you had the misfortun to hangyourselv would cut you down in no time—with astonishingceler—four-and-sixpenc—five—five-and-sixpenc—an appropri thingfor a spare bedroom where there wa a four-poster and a guest a littleout of hi mind—six shill—thank you, mr. clintup—go at sixshil—go—gone!” the auction’s glanc, which had beensearch round him with a preternatur suscept to all sign ofbid, here drop on the paper befor him, and hi voic toodrop into a tone of indiffer despatch as he said, “mr. clintup.be handi, joseph.”“it wa worth six shill to have a fender you could alwai tell thatjok on,” said mr. clintup, laugh low and apologet to hi nextneighbor. he wa a diffid though distinguish nurseryman, andfear that the audienc might regard hi bid as a foolish on.meanwhil joseph had brought a tray of small articl. “now,ladi,” said mr. trumbul, take up on of the articl, “thi traycontain a veri recherchi lot—a collect of trifl for thedraw-room tabl—and trifl make the sum _of_ human thing—nothingmor import than trifl—(ye, mr. ladislaw, ye, by-and-by)—butpass the trai round, joseph—these bijoux must be examin, ladi. thisi have in my hand is an ingeni contriv—a sort of practicalrebu, i mai call it: here, you see, it look like an elegantheart-shape box, portabl—for the pocket; there, again, it becomeslik a splendid doubl flower—an ornament for the tabl; and now”—mr.trumbul allow the flower to fall alarmingli into string ofheart-shape leav—“a book of riddl! no less than five hundredprint in a beauti red. gentlemen, if i had less of a conscienc, ishould not wish you to bid high for thi lot—i have a long for itmyself. what can promot innoc mirth, and i mai sai virtu, morethan a good riddl?—it hinder profan languag, and attach a man toth societi of refin femal. thi ingeni articl itself, withoutth eleg domino-box, card-basket, &c., ought alon to give a highpric to the lot. carri in the pocket it might make an individualwelcom in ani societi. four shill, sir?—four shill for thisremark collect of riddl with the et caetera. here is asampl: ‘how must you spell honei to make it catch ladi-bird?answer—monei.’ you hear?—ladi-bird—honei monei. thi is an amusementto sharpen the intellect; it ha a sting—it ha what we call satir,and wit without indec. four-and-sixpenc—five shill.”the bid ran on with warm rivalri. mr. bowyer wa a bidder, andthi wa too exasper. bowyer couldn’t afford it, and onli wantedto hinder everi other man from make a figur. the current carriedeven mr. horrock with it, but thi committ of himself to an opinionfel from him with so littl sacrific of hi neutral express, thatth bid might not have been detect as hi but for the friendli oathsof mr. bambridg, who want to know what horrock would do with blastedstuff onli fit for haberdash given over to that state of perditionwhich the hors-dealer so cordial recogn in the major ofearthli exist. the lot wa final knock down at a guinea to mr.spilkin, a young slender of the neighborhood, who wa reckless withhi pocket-monei and felt hi want of memori for riddl.“come, trumbul, thi is too bad—you’ve been put some old maid’srubbish into the sale,” murmur mr. toller, get close to theauction. “i want to see how the print go, and i must be off soon.”“_im_mediat, mr. toller. it wa onli an act of benevol whichyour nobl heart would approv. joseph! quick with the print—lot 235.now, gentlemen, you who ar connoiss_ur_, you ar go to have atreat. here is an engrav of the duke of wellington surround by hisstaff on the field of waterloo; and notwithstand recent event whichhav, as it were, envelop our great hero in a cloud, i will be boldto sai—for a man in my line must not be blown about by politicalwind—that a finer subject—of the modern order, belong to our owntim and epoch—the understand of man could hardli conceiv: angelsmight, perhap, but not men, sir, not men.”“who paint it?” said mr. powderel, much impress.“it is a proof befor the letter, mr. powderel—the painter is notknown,” answer trumbul, with a certain gasping in hi lastword, after which he purs up hi lip and stare round him.“i’ll bid a pound!” said mr. powderel, in a tone of resolv emot,as of a man readi to put himself in the breach. whether from aw orpiti, nobodi rais the price on him.next came two dutch print which mr. toller had been eager for, andaft he had secur them he went awai. other print, and afterwardssom paint, were sold to lead middlemarch who had come with aspeci desir for them, and there wa a more activ movement of theaudienc in and out; some, who had bought what thei want, go awai,other come in either quit newli or from a temporari visit to therefresh which were spread under the marque on the lawn. it wasthi marque that mr. bambridg wa bent on bui, and he appear tolik look insid it frequent, as a foretast of it possess. onth last occas of hi return from it he wa observ to bring withhim a new companion, a stranger to mr. trumbul and everi on els,whose appear, howev, led to the supposit that he might be arel of the hors-dealer’s—also “given to indulg.” hi largewhisk, impos swagger, and swing of the leg, made him a strikingfigur; but hi suit of black, rather shabbi at the edg, caus theprejudici infer that he wa not abl to afford himself as muchindulg as he like.“who is it you’ve pick up, bam?” said mr. horrock, asid.“ask him yourself,” return mr. bambridg. “he said he’d just turnedin from the road.”mr. horrock ei the stranger, who wa lean back against hi stickwith on hand, us hi toothpick with the other, and look abouthim with a certain restless appar under the silenc impos onhim by circumst.at length the “supper at emmau” wa brought forward, to will’s immenserelief, for he wa get so tire of the proceed that he haddrawn back a littl and lean hi shoulder against the wall justbehind the auction. he now came forward again, and hi ey caughtth conspicu stranger, who, rather to hi surpris, wa stare athim markedli. but will wa immedi appeal to by mr. trumbul.“ye, mr. ladislaw, ye; thi interest you as a connoiss_ur_, ithink. it is some pleasur,” the auction went on with a risingfervor, “to have a pictur like thi to show to a compani of ladi andgentlemen—a pictur worth ani sum to an individu whose mean were ona level with hi judgment. it is a paint of the italian school—byth celebr _guydo_, the greatest painter in the world, the chief ofth old master, as thei ar call—i take it, becaus thei were up toa thing or two beyond most of us—in possess of secret now lost toth bulk of mankind. let me tell you, gentlemen, i have seen a greatmani pictur by the old master, and thei ar not all up to thismark—some of them ar darker than you might like and not familysubject. but here is a _guydo_—the frame alon is worth pound—whichani ladi might be proud to hang up—a suitabl thing for what we call arefectori in a charit institut, if ani gentleman of thecorpor wish to show hi munifi_cenc_. turn it a littl, sir?ye. joseph, turn it a littl toward mr. ladislaw—mr. ladislaw, havingbeen abroad, understand the merit of these thing, you observ.”all ey were for a moment turn toward will, who said, coolli, “fivepound.” the auction burst out in deep remonstr.“ah! mr. ladislaw! the frame alon is worth that. ladi and gentlemen,for the credit of the town! suppos it should be discov hereafterthat a gem of art ha been amongst us in thi town, and nobodi inmiddlemarch awak to it. five guinea—five seven-six—five ten. still,ladi, still! it is a gem, and ‘full mani a gem,’ as the poet sai,ha been allow to go at a nomin price becaus the public knew nobett, becaus it wa offer in circl where there wa—i wa goingto sai a low feel, but no!—six pound—six guinea—a _guydo_ of thefirst order go at six guinea—it is an insult to religion, ladi;it touch us all as christian, gentlemen, that a subject like thisshould go at such a low figur—six pound ten—seven—”the bid wa brisk, and will continu to share in it, rememberingthat mr. bulstrod had a strong wish for the pictur, and thinkingthat he might stretch the price to twelv pound. but it wa knockeddown to him at ten guinea, whereupon he push hi wai toward thebow-window and went out. he chose to go under the marque to get aglass of water, be hot and thirsti: it wa empti of other visitor,and he ask the woman in attend to fetch him some fresh water; butbefor she wa well gone he wa annoi to see enter the floridstrang who had stare at him. it struck will at thi moment that theman might be on of those polit parasit insect of the bloatedkind who had onc or twice claim acquaint with him as havingheard him speak on the reform question, and who might think of gettinga shill by new. in thi light hi person, alreadi rather heat tobehold on a summer’s dai, appear the more disagre; and will,half-seat on the elbow of a garden-chair, turn hi ey carefullyawai from the comer. but thi signifi littl to our acquaint mr.raffl, who never hesit to thrust himself on unwillingobserv, if it suit hi purpos to do so. he move a step or twotil he wa in front of will, and said with full-mouth hast, “excusem, mr. ladislaw—wa your mother’s name sarah dunkirk?”will, start to hi feet, move backward a step, frown, and sayingwith some fierc, “ye, sir, it wa. and what is that to you?”it wa in will’s natur that the first spark it threw out wa a directansw of the question and a challeng of the consequ. to havesaid, “what is that to you?” in the first instanc, would have seemedlik shuffl—as if he mind who knew anyth about hi origin!raffl on hi side had not the same eager for a collis whichwa impli in ladislaw’s threaten air. the slim young fellow withhi girl’s complexion look like a tiger-cat readi to spring on him.under such circumst mr. raffl’s pleasur in annoi hi companywa kept in abey.“no offenc, my good sir, no offenc! i onli rememb your mother—knewher when she wa a girl. but it is your father that you featur, sir. ihad the pleasur of see your father too. parent aliv, mr.ladislaw?”“no!” thunder will, in the same attitud as befor.“should be glad to do you a servic, mr. ladislaw—by jove, i should!hope to meet again.”hereupon raffl, who had lift hi hat with the last word, turnedhimself round with a swing of hi leg and walk awai. will lookedaft him a moment, and could see that he did not re-enter theauction-room, but appear to be walk toward the road. for aninst he thought that he had been foolish not to let the man go ontalk;—but no! on the whole he prefer do without knowledg fromthat sourc.later in the even, howev, raffl overtook him in the street, andappear either to have forgotten the rough of hi formerrecept or to intend aveng it by a forgiv familiar, greetedhim jovial and walk by hi side, remark at first on thepleas of the town and neighborhood. will suspect that the manhad been drink and wa consid how to shake him off when rafflessaid—“i’ve been abroad myself, mr. ladislaw—i’ve seen the world—us toparlei-vou a littl. it wa at boulogn i saw your father—a mostuncommon like you ar of him, by jove! mouth—nose—ey—hair turnedoff your brow just like hi—a littl in the foreign style. john bulldoesn’t do much of that. but your father wa veri ill when i saw him.lord, lord! hand you might see through. you were a small youngsterthen. did he get well?”“no,” said will, curtli.“ah! well! i’ve often wonder what becam of your mother. she ran awayfrom her friend when she wa a young lass—a proud-spirit lass, andpretti, by jove! i knew the reason why she ran awai,” said raffl,wink slowli as he look sidewai at will.“you know noth dishonor of her, sir,” said will, turn on himrath savag. but mr. raffl just now wa not sensit to shadesof manner.“not a bit!” said he, toss hi head decis. “she wa a littletoo honor to like her friend—that wa it!” here raffl againwink slowli. “lord bless you, i knew all about ’em—a littl in whatyou mai call the respect thiev line—the high style ofreceiv-hous—none of your hole and corner—first-rate. slap-upshop, high profit and no mistak. but lord! sarah would have knownnoth about it—a dash young ladi she wa—fine board-school—fitfor a lord’s wife—onli archi duncan threw it at her out of spite,becaus she would have noth to do with him. and so she ran awai fromth whole concern. i travel for ’em, sir, in a gentlemanli wai—at ahigh salari. thei didn’t mind her run awai at first—godli folk,sir, veri godli—and she wa for the stage. the son wa aliv then, andth daughter wa at a discount. hallo! here we ar at the blue bull.what do you sai, mr. ladislaw?—shall we turn in and have a glass?”“no, i must sai good even,” said will, dash up a passag whichl into lowick gate, and almost run to get out of raffl’s reach.he walk a long while on the lowick road awai from the town, glad ofth starlit dark when it came. he felt as if he had had dirt caston him amidst shout of scorn. there wa thi to confirm the fellow’sstatement—that hi mother never would tell him the reason why she hadrun awai from her famili.well! what wa he, will ladislaw, the wors, suppos the truth aboutthat famili to be the ugliest? hi mother had brave hardship in orderto separ herself from it. but if dorothea’s friend had known thisstori—if the chettam had known it—thei would have had a fine color togiv their suspicion a welcom ground for think him unfit to comenear her. howev, let them suspect what thei pleas, thei would findthemselv in the wrong. thei would find out that the blood in hisvein wa as free from the taint of mean as their.chapter lxi.“inconsist,” answer imlac, “cannot both be right, but imputedto man thei mai both be true.”—_rassela_.the same night, when mr. bulstrod return from a journei to brassingon busi, hi good wife met him in the entranc-hall and drew himinto hi privat sit-room.“nichola,” she said, fix her honest ey upon him anxious, “thereha been such a disagre man here ask for you—it ha made mequit uncomfort.”“what kind of man, my dear,” said mr. bulstrod, dreadfulli certain ofth answer.“a red-face man with larg whisker, and most impud in hi manner.he declar he wa an old friend of your, and said you would be sorrynot to see him. he want to wait for you here, but i told him he couldse you at the bank to-morrow morn. most impud he wa!—stare atm, and said hi friend nick had luck in wive. i don’t believ hewould have gone awai, if blucher had not happen to break hi chainand come run round on the gravel—for i wa in the garden; so isaid, ‘you’d better go awai—the dog is veri fierc, and i can’t holdhim.’ do you realli know anyth of such a man?”“i believ i know who he is, my dear,” said mr. bulstrod, in hi usualsubdu voic, “an unfortun dissolut wretch, whom i help too muchin dai gone by. howev, i presum you will not be troubl by himagain. he will probabl come to the bank—to beg, doubtless.”no more wa said on the subject until the next dai, when mr. bulstrodehad return from the town and wa dress for dinner. hi wife, notsur that he wa come home, look into hi dress-room and saw himwith hi coat and cravat off, lean on arm on a chest of drawer andstar absent at the ground. he start nervous and look up assh enter.“you look veri ill, nichola. is there anyth the matter?”“i have a good deal of pain in my head,” said mr. bulstrod, who wa sofrequ ail that hi wife wa alwai readi to believ in thiscaus of depress.“sit down and let me spong it with vinegar.”physic mr. bulstrod did not want the vinegar, but moral theaffection attent sooth him. though alwai polit, it wa hishabit to receiv such servic with marit cool, as hi wife’sduti. but to-dai, while she wa bend over him, he said, “you areveri good, harriet,” in a tone which had someth new in it to herear; she did not know exactli what the novelti wa, but her woman’ssolicitud shape itself into a dart thought that he might be goingto have an ill.“ha anyth worri you?” she said. “did that man come to you at thebank?”“ye; it wa as i had suppos. he is a man who at on time might havedon better. but he ha sunk into a drunken debauch creatur.”“is he quit gone awai?” said mr. bulstrod, anxious; but forcertain reason she refrain from ad, “it wa veri disagre tohear him call himself a friend of your.” at that moment she wouldnot have like to sai anyth which impli her habitu consciousnessthat her husband’s earlier connect were not quit on a level withher own. not that she knew much about them. that her husband had atfirst been emploi in a bank, that he had afterward enter into whath call citi busi and gain a fortun befor he wasthre-and-thirti, that he had marri a widow who wa much older thanhimself—a dissent, and in other wai probabl of that disadvantageousqu usual percept in a first wife if inquir into with thedispassion judgment of a second—wa almost as much as she had caredto learn beyond the glimps which mr. bulstrod’s narrativeoccasion gave of hi earli bent toward religion, hi inclinationto be a preacher, and hi associ with missionari and philanthropiceffort. she believ in him as an excel man whose pieti carri apeculiar emin in belong to a layman, whose influenc had turnedh own mind toward serious, and whose share of perish good hadbeen the mean of rais her own posit. but she also like to thinkthat it wa well in everi sens for mr. bulstrod to have won the handof harriet vinci; whose famili wa undeni in a middlemarch light—abett light sure than ani thrown in london thoroughfar ordiss chapel-yard. the unreform provinci mind distrustedlondon; and while true religion wa everywher save, honest mr.bulstrod wa convinc that to be save in the church wa morerespect. she so much wish to ignor toward other that herhusband had ever been a london dissent, that she like to keep it outof sight even in talk to him. he wa quit awar of thi; inde insom respect he wa rather afraid of thi ingenu wife, whoseimit pieti and nativ worldli were equal sincer, who hadnoth to be asham of, and whom he had marri out of a thoroughinclin still subsist. but hi fear were such as belong to aman who care to maintain hi recogn supremaci: the loss of highconsider from hi wife, as from everi on els who did not clearlyh him out of enmiti to the truth, would be as the begin of deathto him. when she said—“is he quit gone awai?”“oh, i trust so,” he answer, with an effort to throw as much soberunconcern into hi tone as possibl!but in truth mr. bulstrod wa veri far from a state of quiet trust. inth interview at the bank, raffl had made it evid that hiseag to torment wa almost as strong in him as ani other greed. hehad frankli said that he had turn out of the wai to come tomiddlemarch, just to look about him and see whether the neighborhoodwould suit him to live in. he had certainli had a few debt to pai morethan he expect, but the two hundr pound were not gone yet: a coolfiv-and-twenti would suffic him to go awai with for the present. whath had want chiefli wa to see hi friend nick and famili, and knowal about the prosper of a man to whom he wa so much attach.by-and-by he might come back for a longer stai. thi time rafflesdeclin to be “seen off the premis,” as he express it—declin toquit middlemarch under bulstrod’s ey. he meant to go by coach thenext dai—if he chose.bulstrod felt himself helpless. neither threat nor coax couldavail: he could not count on ani persist fear nor on ani promis. onth contrari, he felt a cold certainti at hi heart that raffl—unlessprovid sent death to hinder him—would come back to middlemarchbefor long. and that certainti wa a terror.it wa not that he wa in danger of legal punish or of beggari: hewa in danger onli of see disclos to the judgment of hi neighborsand the mourn percept of hi wife certain fact of hi past lifewhich would render him an object of scorn and an opprobrium of thereligion with which he had dilig associ himself. the terror ofb judg sharpen the memori: it send an inevit glare overthat long-unvisit past which ha been habitu recal onli ingener phrase. even without memori, the life is bound into on by azon of depend in growth and decai; but intens memori forc a manto own hi blameworthi past. with memori set smart like a reopenedwound, a man’s past is not simpli a dead histori, an outwornprepar of the present: it is not a repent error shaken loosefrom the life: it is a still quiver part of himself, bringingshudd and bitter flavor and the tingl of a merit shame.into thi second life bulstrod’s past had now risen, onli thepleasur of it seem to have lost their qualiti. night and dai,without interrupt save of brief sleep which onli wove retrospect andfear into a fantast present, he felt the scene of hi earlier lifecom between him and everyth els, as obstin as when we lookthrough the window from a light room, the object we turn our backson ar still befor us, instead of the grass and the tree. thesuccess event inward and outward were there in on view: thougheach might be dwelt on in turn, the rest still kept their hold in theconsci.onc more he saw himself the young banker’s clerk, with an agreeableperson, as clever in figur as he wa fluent in speech and fond oftheolog definit: an emin though young member of a calvinisticdiss church at highburi, have had strike experi inconvict of sin and sens of pardon. again he heard himself calledfor as brother bulstrod in prayer meet, speak on religiousplatform, preach in privat hous. again he felt himself thinkingof the ministri as possibl hi vocat, and inclin towardsmissionari labor. that wa the happiest time of hi life: that wa thespot he would have chosen now to awak in and find the rest a dream.the peopl among whom brother bulstrod wa distinguish were veryfew, but thei were veri near to him, and stir hi satisfact themor; hi power stretch through a narrow space, but he felt itseffect the more intens. he believ without effort in the peculiarwork of grace within him, and in the sign that god intend him forspeci instrument.then came the moment of transit; it wa with the sens of promotionh had when he, an orphan educ at a commerci chariti-school, wasinvit to a fine villa belong to mr. dunkirk, the richest man inth congreg. soon he becam an intim there, honor for hispieti by the wife, mark out for hi abil by the husband, whosewealth wa due to a flourish citi and west-end trade. that wa theset-in of a new current for hi ambit, direct hi prospectsof “instrument” toward the unit of distinguish religiousgift with success busi.by-and-by came a decid extern lead: a confidenti subordinatepartn di, and nobodi seem to the princip so well fit to fillth sever felt vacanc as hi young friend bulstrod, if he wouldbecom confidenti account. the offer wa accept. the businesswa a pawnbrok’s, of the most magnific sort both in extent andprofit; and on a short acquaint with it bulstrod becam awarethat on sourc of magnific profit wa the easi recept of anygood offer, without strict inquiri as to where thei came from. butther wa a branch hous at the west end, and no petti or dinginessto give suggest of shame.he rememb hi first moment of shrink. thei were privat, andwer fill with argument; some of these take the form of prayer.the busi wa establish and had old root; is it not on thing toset up a new gin-palac and anoth to accept an invest in an oldon? the profit made out of lost soul—where can the line be drawn atwhich thei begin in human transact? wa it not even god’s wai ofsav hi chosen? “thou knowest,”—the young bulstrod had said then,as the older bulstrod wa sai now—“thou knowest how loos my soulsit from these thing—how i view them all as implement for tillingthi garden rescu here and there from the wilder.”metaphor and preced were not want; peculiar spiritualexperi were not want which at last made the retent of hisposit seem a servic demand of him: the vista of a fortun hadalreadi open itself, and bulstrod’s shrink remain privat. mr.dunkirk had never expect that there would be ani shrink at all: hehad never conceiv that trade had anyth to do with the scheme ofsalv. and it wa true that bulstrod found himself carri on twodistinct live; hi religi activ could not be incompat withhi busi as soon as he had argu himself into not feel itincompat.mental surround with that past again, bulstrod had the sameplea—inde, the year had been perpetu spin them intointr thick, like mass of spider-web, pad the moralsens; nai, as ag made egoism more eager but less enjoi, hissoul had becom more satur with the belief that he did everythingfor god’s sake, be indiffer to it for hi own. and yet—if hecould be back in that far-off spot with hi youth poverti—why, thenh would choos to be a missionari.but the train of caus in which he had lock himself went on. therewa troubl in the fine villa at highburi. year befor, the onlydaught had run awai, defi her parent, and gone on the stage; andnow the onli boi di, and after a short time mr. dunkirk di also.the wife, a simpl piou woman, left with all the wealth in and out ofth magnific trade, of which she never knew the precis natur, hadcom to believ in bulstrod, and innoc ador him as women oftenador their priest or “man-made” minist. it wa natur that after atim marriag should have been thought of between them. but mr.dunkirk had qualm and yearn about her daughter, who had long beenregard as lost both to god and her parent. it wa known that thedaught had marri, but she wa utterli gone out of sight. themoth, have lost her boi, imagin a grandson, and wish in adoubl sens to reclaim her daughter. if she were found, there would bea channel for properti—perhap a wide on—in the provis for severalgrandchildren. effort to find her must be made befor mr. dunkirkwould marri again. bulstrod concur; but after advertis as wella other mode of inquiri had been tri, the mother believ that herdaught wa not to be found, and consent to marri withoutreserv of properti.the daughter had been found; but onli on man besid bulstrod knewit, and he wa paid for keep silenc and carri himself awai.that wa the bare fact which bulstrod wa now forc to see in therigid outlin with which act present themselv to onlook. but forhimself at that distant time, and even now in burn memori, the factwa broken into littl sequenc, each justifi as it came byreason which seem to prove it righteou. bulstrod’s cours up tothat time had, he thought, been sanction by remark provid,appear to point the wai for him to be the agent in make the bestus of a larg properti and withdraw it from pervers. death andoth strike disposit, such as feminin trust, had come;and bulstrod would have adopt cromwel’s word—“do you call thesebar event? the lord piti you!” the event were compar small,but the essenti condit wa there—name, that thei were in favorof hi own end. it wa easi for him to settl what wa due from him toother by inquir what were god’s intent with regard to himself.could it be for god’s servic that thi fortun should in anyconsider proport go to a young woman and her husband who weregiven up to the lightest pursuit, and might scatter it abroad intrivi—peopl who seem to lie outsid the path of remarkableprovid? bulstrod had never said to himself beforehand, “thedaught shall not be found”—nevertheless when the moment came he kepther exist hidden; and when other moment follow, he sooth themoth with consol in the probabl that the unhappi young womanmight be no more.there were hour in which bulstrod felt that hi action wasunright; but how could he go back? he had mental exercis, calledhimself nought, laid hold on redempt, and went on in hi cours ofinstrument. and after five year death again came to widen hispath, by take awai hi wife. he did gradual withdraw hi capit,but he did not make the sacrific requisit to put an end to thebusi, which wa carri on for thirteen year afterward befor itfin collaps. meanwhil nichola bulstrod had us hi hundredthousand discreetli, and wa becom provinci, solidli import—abank, a churchman, a public benefactor; also a sleep partner intrad concern, in which hi abil wa direct to economi in theraw materi, as in the case of the dye which rot mr. vinci’s silk.and now, when thi respect had last undisturb for nearlythirti year—when all that preced it had long lain benumb in theconsci—that past had risen and immers hi thought as if withth terribl irrupt of a new sens overburthen the feebl be.meanwhil, in hi convers with raffl, he had learn somethingmoment, someth which enter activ into the struggl of hislong and terror. there, he thought, lai an open towardsspiritu, perhap toward materi rescu.the spiritu kind of rescu wa a genuin need with him. there mai becoars hypocrit, who conscious affect belief and emot for thesak of gull the world, but bulstrod wa not on of them. he wassimpli a man whose desir had been stronger than hi theoreticbelief, and who had gradual explain the gratif of hisdesir into satisfactori agreement with those belief. if thi behypocrisi, it is a process which show itself occasion in us all,to whatev confess we belong, and whether we believ in the futureperfect of our race or in the nearest date fix for the end of theworld; whether we regard the earth as a putrefi nidu for a savedremn, includ ourselv, or have a passion belief in thesolidar of mankind.the servic he could do to the caus of religion had been through lifeth ground he alleg to himself for hi choic of action: it had beenth motiv which he had pour out in hi prayer. who would us moneyand posit better than he meant to us them? who could surpass him inself-abhorr and exalt of god’s caus? and to mr. bulstrodegod’s caus wa someth distinct from hi own rectitud of conduct:it enforc a discrimin of god’s enemi, who were to be usedmer as instrument, and whom it would be as well if possibl to keepout of monei and consequ influenc. also, profit invest intrad where the power of the princ of thi world show it mostact devic, becam sanctifi by a right applic of the profitsin the hand of god’s servant.thi implicit reason is essenti no more peculiar to evangelicalbelief than the us of wide phrase for narrow motiv is peculiar toenglishmen. there is no gener doctrin which is not capabl of eatingout our moral if uncheck by the deep-seat habit of directfellow-feel with individu fellow-men.but a man who believ in someth els than hi own greed, hasnecessarili a conscienc or standard to which he more or less adaptshimself. bulstrod’s standard had been hi servic to god’scaus: “i am sin and nought—a vessel to be consecr by us—butus me!”—had been the mould into which he had constrain hi immensene of be someth import and predomin. and now had come amoment in which that mould seem in danger of be broken and utterlycast awai.what if the act he had reconcil himself to becaus thei made him astrong instrument of the divin glori, were to becom the pretext ofth scoffer, and a darken of that glori? if thi were to be therul of provid, he wa cast out from the templ as on who hadbrought unclean offer.he had long pour out utter of repent. but todai a repentancehad come which wa of a bitter flavor, and a threaten providenceurg him to a kind of propiti which wa not simpli a doctrinaltransact. the divin tribun had chang it aspect for him;self-prostrat wa no longer enough, and he must bring restitut inhi hand. it wa realli befor hi god that bulstrod wa about toattempt such restitut as seem possibl: a great dread had seizedhi suscept frame, and the scorch approach of shame wrought inhim a new spiritu need. night and dai, while the resurgentthreaten past wa make a conscienc within him, he wa think bywhat mean he could recov peac and trust—by what sacrific he couldstai the rod. hi belief in these moment of dread wa, that if hespontan did someth right, god would save him from theconsequ of wrong-do. for religion can onli chang when theemot which fill it ar chang; and the religion of person fearremain nearli at the level of the savag.he had seen raffl actual go awai on the brass coach, and thiswa a temporari relief; it remov the pressur of an immedi dread,but did not put an end to the spiritu conflict and the need to winprotect. at last he came to a difficult resolv, and wrote a letterto will ladislaw, beg him to be at the shrub that even for apriv interview at nine o’clock. will had felt no particular surpriseat the request, and connect it with some new notion about the“pioneer;” but when he wa shown into mr. bulstrod’s privat room, hewa struck with the painfulli worn look on the banker’s face, and wasgo to sai, “ar you ill?” when, check himself in that abrupt,he onli inquir after mr. bulstrod, and her satisfact with thepictur bought for her.“thank you, she is quit satisfi; she ha gone out with her daughtersthi even. i beg you to come, mr. ladislaw, becaus i have acommun of a veri privat—inde, i will sai, of a sacredlyconfidenti natur, which i desir to make to you. noth, i daresai, ha been farther from your thought than that there had beenimport ti in the past which could connect your histori with mine.”will felt someth like an electr shock. he wa alreadi in a stateof keen sensit and hardli allai agit on the subject ofti in the past, and hi presenti were not agreeabl. it seemedlik the fluctuat of a dream—as if the action begun by that loudbloat stranger were be carri on by thi pale-ei sickli lookingpiec of respect, whose subdu tone and glib formal ofspeech were at thi moment almost as repuls to him as theirrememb contrast. he answer, with a mark chang of color—“no, inde, noth.”“you see befor you, mr. ladislaw, a man who is deepli stricken. butfor the urgenc of conscienc and the knowledg that i am befor thebar of on who seeth not as man seeth, i should be under no compulsionto make the disclosur which ha been my object in ask you to comeher to-night. so far as human law go, you have no claim on mewhatev.”will wa even more uncomfort than wonder. mr. bulstrod hadpaus, lean hi head on hi hand, and look at the floor. but henow fix hi examin glanc on will and said—“i am told that your mother’s name wa sarah dunkirk, and that she ranawai from her friend to go on the stage. also, that your father wa aton time much emaci by ill. mai i ask if you can confirm thesestat?”“ye, thei ar all true,” said will, struck with the order in which aninquiri had come, that might have been expect to be preliminari toth banker’s previou hint. but mr. bulstrod had to-night followedth order of hi emot; he entertain no doubt that the opportunityfor restitut had come, and he had an overpow impuls towardsth penitenti express by which he wa deprec chastis.“do you know ani particular of your mother’s famili?” he continu.“no; she never like to speak of them. she wa a veri gener,honor woman,” said will, almost angrili.“i do not wish to alleg anyth against her. did she never mentionh mother to you at all?”“i have heard her sai that she thought her mother did not know thereason of her run awai. she said ‘poor mother’ in a piti tone.”“that mother becam my wife,” said bulstrod, and then paus a momentbefor he ad, “you have a claim on me, mr. ladislaw: as i saidbefor, not a legal claim, but on which my conscienc recogn. iwa enrich by that marriag—a result which would probabl not havetaken place—certainli not to the same extent—if your grandmoth couldhav discov her daughter. that daughter, i gather, is no longerliv!”“no,” said will, feel suspicion and repugn rise so stronglywithin him, that without quit know what he did, he took hi hatfrom the floor and stood up. the impuls within him wa to reject thedisclos connect.“prai be seat, mr. ladislaw,” said bulstrod, anxious. “doubtlessy ar startl by the sudden of thi discoveri. but i entreatyour patienc with on who is alreadi bow down by inward trial.”will reseat himself, feel some piti which wa half contempt forthi voluntari self-abas of an elderli man.“it is my wish, mr. ladislaw, to make amend for the depriv whichbefel your mother. i know that you ar without fortun, and i wish tosuppli you adequ from a store which would have probabl alreadybeen your had your grandmoth been certain of your mother’s existenceand been abl to find her.”mr. bulstrod paus. he felt that he wa perform a strike pieceof scrupulos in the judgment of hi auditor, and a penitenti actin the ey of god. he had no clew to the state of will ladislaw’smind, smart as it wa from the clear hint of raffl, and with itsnatur quick in construct stimul by the expect ofdiscoveri which he would have been glad to conjur back intodark. will made no answer for sever moment, till mr. bulstrod,who at the end of hi speech had cast hi ey on the floor, now raisedthem with an examin glanc, which will met fulli, sai—“i suppos you did know of my mother’s exist, and knew where shemight have been found.”bulstrod shrank—there wa a visibl quiver in hi face and hand.he wa total unprepar to have hi advanc met in thi wai, or tofind himself urg into more revel than he had beforehand set downa need. but at that moment he dare not tell a lie, and he feltsuddenli uncertain of hi ground which he had trodden with someconfid befor.“i will not deni that you conjectur rightli,” he answer, with afalt in hi tone. “and i wish to make aton to you as the onestil remain who ha suffer a loss through me. you enter, i trust,into my purpos, mr. ladislaw, which ha a refer to higher thanmer human claim, and as i have alreadi said, is entirelyindepend of ani legal compuls. i am readi to narrow my ownresourc and the prospect of my famili by bind myself to allow youfiv hundr pound yearli dure my life, and to leav you aproport capit at my death—nai, to do still more, if more shouldb definit necessari to ani laudabl project on your part.” mr.bulstrod had gone on to particular in the expect that thesewould work strongli on ladislaw, and merg other feel in gratefulaccept.but will wa look as stubborn as possibl, with hi lip pout andhi finger in hi side-pocket. he wa not in the least touch, andsaid firmli,—“befor i make ani repli to your proposit, mr. bulstrod, i must begyou to answer a question or two. were you connect with the businessbi which that fortun you speak of wa origin made?”mr. bulstrod’s thought wa, “raffl ha told him.” how could herefus to answer when he had volunt what drew forth the question?he answer, “ye.”“and wa that busi—or wa it not—a thoroughli dishonor on—nai,on that, if it natur had been made public, might have rank thoseconcern in it with thiev and convict?”will’s tone had a cut bitter: he wa move to put hi questiona nakedli as he could.bulstrod redden with irrepress anger. he had been prepar for ascen of self-abas, but hi intens pride and hi habit ofsupremaci overpow penit, and even dread, when thi young man,whom he had meant to benefit, turn on him with the air of a judg.“the busi wa establish befor i becam connect with it, sir;nor is it for you to institut an inquiri of that kind,” he answer,not rais hi voic, but speak with quick defiant.“ye, it is,” said will, start up again with hi hat in hi hand.“it is emin mine to ask such question, when i have to decidewheth i will have transact with you and accept your monei. myunblemish honor is import to me. it is import to me to have nostain on my birth and connect. and now i find there is a stainwhich i can’t help. my mother felt it, and tri to keep as clear of ita she could, and so will i. you shall keep your ill-gotten monei. if ihad ani fortun of my own, i would willingli pai it to ani on whocould disprov what you have told me. what i have to thank you for isthat you kept the monei till now, when i can refus it. it ought to liewith a man’s self that he is a gentleman. good-night, sir.”bulstrod wa go to speak, but will, with determin quick, wasout of the room in an instant, and in anoth the hall-door had closedbehind him. he wa too strongli possess with passion rebellionagainst thi inherit blot which had been thrust on hi knowledg toreflect at present whether he had not been too hard on bulstrod—tooarrogantli merciless toward a man of sixti, who wa make effort atretriev when time had render them vain.no third person listen could have thoroughli understood theimpetuos of will’s repuls or the bitter of hi word. no onebut himself then knew how everyth connect with the sentiment ofhi own digniti had an immedi bear for him on hi relat todorothea and to mr. casaubon’s treatment of him. and in the rush ofimpuls by which he flung back that offer of bulstrod’s there wasmingl the sens that it would have been imposs for him ever totel dorothea that he had accept it.as for bulstrod—when will wa gone he suffer a violent reaction, andwept like a woman. it wa the first time he had encount an openexpress of scorn from ani man higher than raffl; and with thatscorn hurri like venom through hi system, there wa no sensibilityleft to consol. but the relief of weep had to be check. hiswif and daughter soon came home from hear the address of anorient missionari, and were full of regret that papa had not heard,in the first instanc, the interest thing which thei tri torepeat to him.perhap, through all other hidden thought, the on that breath mostcomfort wa, that will ladislaw at least wa not like to publish whathad taken place that even.chapter lxii.he wa a squyer of low degr,that love the king’s daughter of hungri.—_old romanc_.will ladislaw’s mind wa now wholli bent on see dorothea again, andforthwith quit middlemarch. the morn after hi agit scenewith bulstrod he wrote a brief letter to her, sai that variouscaus had detain him in the neighborhood longer than he hadexpect, and ask her permiss to call again at lowick at somehour which she would mention on the earliest possibl dai, he beinganxi to depart, but unwil to do so until she had grant him aninterview. he left the letter at the offic, order the messeng tocarri it to lowick manor, and wait for an answer.ladislaw felt the awkward of ask for more last word. hi formerfarewel had been made in the hear of sir jame chettam, and hadbeen announc as final even to the butler. it is certainli try to aman’s digniti to reappear when he is not expect to do so: a firstfarewel ha patho in it, but to come back for a second lend anopen to comedi, and it wa possibl even that there might be bittersn afloat about will’s motiv for linger. still it wa on thewhol more satisfactori to hi feel to take the directest mean ofse dorothea, than to us ani devic which might give an air ofchanc to a meet of which he wish her to understand that it waswhat he earnestli sought. when he had part from her befor, he hadbeen in ignor of fact which gave a new aspect to the relationbetween them, and made a more absolut sever than he had thenbeliev in. he knew noth of dorothea’s privat fortun, and beinglittl us to reflect on such matter, took it for grant thataccord to mr. casaubon’s arrang marriag to him, will ladislaw,would mean that she consent to be penniless. that wa not what hecould wish for even in hi secret heart, or even if she had been readyto meet such hard contrast for hi sake. and then, too, there wa thefresh smart of that disclosur about hi mother’s famili, which ifknown would be an ad reason why dorothea’s friend should look downupon him as utterli below her. the secret hope that after some year hemight come back with the sens that he had at least a person valueequ to her wealth, seem now the dreami continu of a dream.thi chang would sure justifi him in ask dorothea to receiv himonc more.but dorothea on that morn wa not at home to receiv will’s note. inconsequ of a letter from her uncl announc hi intent to beat home in a week, she had driven first to freshitt to carri the new,mean to go on to the grang to deliv some order with which heruncl had intrust her—think, as he said, “a littl mentaloccup of thi sort good for a widow.”if will ladislaw could have overheard some of the talk at freshitt thatmorn, he would have felt all hi supposit confirm as to thereadi of certain peopl to sneer at hi linger in theneighborhood. sir jame, inde, though much reliev concerningdorothea, had been on the watch to learn ladislaw’s movement, and hadan instruct inform in mr. standish, who wa necessarili in hisconfid on thi matter. that ladislaw had stai in middlemarchnearli two month after he had declar that he wa go immedi,wa a fact to embitt sir jame’s suspicion, or at least to justifyhi avers to a “young fellow” whom he repres to himself asslight, volatil, and like enough to show such reckless asnatur went along with a posit unrivet by famili ti or astrict profess. but he had just heard someth from standish which,while it justifi these surmis about will, offer a mean ofnullifi all danger with regard to dorothea.unwont circumst mai make us all rather unlik ourselv: therear condit under which the most majest person is oblig tosneez, and our emot ar liabl to be act on in the sameincongru manner. good sir jame wa thi morn so far unlikehimself that he wa irrit anxiou to sai someth to dorothea on asubject which he usual avoid as if it had been a matter of shame tothem both. he could not us celia as a medium, becaus he did notchoos that she should know the kind of gossip he had in hi mind; andbefor dorothea happen to arriv he had been try to imagin how,with hi shyness and unreadi tongu, he could ever manag to introducehi commun. her unexpect presenc brought him to utterhopeless in hi own power of sai anyth unpleas; butdesper suggest a resourc; he sent the groom on an unsaddledhors across the park with a pencil note to mr. cadwallad, whoalreadi knew the gossip, and would think it no compromis of herself torepeat it as often as requir.dorothea wa detain on the good pretext that mr. garth, whom shewant to see, wa expect at the hall within the hour, and she wasstil talk to caleb on the gravel when sir jame, on the watch forth rector’s wife, saw her come and met her with the need hint.“enough! i understand,”—said mr. cadwallad. “you shall be innoc.i am such a blackamoor that i cannot smirch myself.”“i don’t mean that it’s of ani consequ,” said sir jame, dislikingthat mr. cadwallad should understand too much. “onli it is desirablethat dorothea should know there ar reason why she should not receivehim again; and i realli can’t sai so to her. it will come lightli fromyou.”it came veri lightli inde. when dorothea quit caleb and turn tomeet them, it appear that mr. cadwallad had step across thepark by the merest chanc in the world, just to chat with celia in amatronli wai about the babi. and so mr. brook wa come back?delight!—come back, it wa to be hope, quit cure ofparliamentari fever and pioneer. apropo of the “pioneer”—somebodyhad prophesi that it would soon be like a dy dolphin, and turn allcolor for want of know how to help itself, becaus mr. brook’sproteg, the brilliant young ladislaw, wa gone or go. had sir jamesheard that?the three were walk along the gravel slowli, and sir jame, turningasid to whip a shrub, said he had heard someth of that sort.“all fals!” said mr. cadwallad. “he is not gone, or go,appar; the ‘pioneer’ keep it color, and mr. orlando ladislaw ismak a sad dark-blue scandal by warbl continu with your mr.lydgat’s wife, who thei tell me is as pretti as pretti can be. itseem nobodi ever goe into the hous without find thi younggentleman ly on the rug or warbl at the piano. but the peopl inmanufactur town ar alwai disreput.”“you began by sai that on report wa fals, mr. cadwallad, and ibeliev thi is fals too,” said dorothea, with indign energi; “atleast, i feel sure it is a misrepresent. i will not hear ani evilspoken of mr. ladislaw; he ha alreadi suffer too much injustic.”dorothea when thoroughli move care littl what ani on thought of herfeel; and even if she had been abl to reflect, she would have heldit petti to keep silenc at injuri word about will from fear ofb herself misunderstood. her face wa flush and her lip trembl.sir jame, glanc at her, repent of hi stratagem; but mr.cadwallad, equal to all occas, spread the palm of her handsoutward and said—“heaven grant it, my dear!—i mean that all bad talesabout anybodi mai be fals. but it is a piti that young lydgat shouldhav marri on of these middlemarch girl. consid he’s a son ofsomebodi, he might have got a woman with good blood in her vein, andnot too young, who would have put up with hi profess. there’s claraharfag, for instanc, whose friend don’t know what to do with her;and she ha a portion. then we might have had her among us.howev!—it’s no us be wise for other peopl. where is celia? praylet us go in.”“i am go on immedi to tipton,” said dorothea, rather haughtili.“good-by.”sir jame could sai noth as he accompani her to the carriag. hewa altogeth discont with the result of a contriv which hadcost him some secret humili beforehand.dorothea drove along between the berri hedgerow and the shorncorn-field, not see or hear anyth around. the tear came androl down her cheek, but she did not know it. the world, it seem,wa turn ugli and hate, and there wa no place for hertrust. “it is not true—it is not true!” wa the voic within herthat she listen to; but all the while a remembr to which therehad alwai clung a vagu uneasi would thrust itself on herattent—the remembr of that dai when she had found will ladislawwith mr. lydgat, and had heard hi voic accompani by the piano.“he said he would never do anyth that i disapprov—i wish i couldhav told him that i disapprov of that,” said poor dorothea,inwardli, feel a strang altern between anger with will and thepassion defenc of him. “thei all try to blacken him befor me; buti will care for no pain, if he is not to blame. i alwai believ hewa good.”—these were her last thought befor she felt that thecarriag wa pass under the archwai of the lodg-gate at the grang,when she hurriedli press her handkerchief to her face and began tothink of her errand. the coachman beg leav to take out the horsesfor half an hour as there wa someth wrong with a shoe; anddorothea, have the sens that she wa go to rest, took off herglov and bonnet, while she wa lean against a statu in theentranc-hall, and talk to the housekeep. at last she said—“i must stai here a littl, mr. kell. i will go into the librari andwrit you some memoranda from my uncl’s letter, if you will open theshutt for me.”“the shutter ar open, madam,” said mr. kell, follow dorothea, whohad walk along as she spoke. “mr. ladislaw is there, look forsometh.”(will had come to fetch a portfolio of hi own sketch which he hadmiss in the act of pack hi movabl, and did not choos to leavebehind.)dorothea’s heart seem to turn over as if it had had a blow, but shewa not percept check: in truth, the sens that will wa therewa for the moment all-satisfi to her, like the sight of somethingpreci that on ha lost. when she reach the door she said to mr.kell—“go in first, and tell him that i am here.”will had found hi portfolio, and had laid it on the tabl at the farend of the room, to turn over the sketch and pleas himself bylook at the memor piec of art which had a relat to naturetoo mysteri for dorothea. he wa smile at it still, and shakingth sketch into order with the thought that he might find a letterfrom her await him at middlemarch, when mr. kell close to hi elbowsaid—“mr. casaubon is come in, sir.”will turn round quickli, and the next moment dorothea wa enter.as mr. kell close the door behind her thei met: each wa look atth other, and conscious wa overflow by someth thatsuppress utter. it wa not confus that kept them silent, forthei both felt that part wa near, and there is no shamefaced ina sad part.she move automat toward her uncl’s chair against thewrit-tabl, and will, after draw it out a littl for her, went afew pace off and stood opposit to her.“prai sit down,” said dorothea, cross her hand on her lap; “i amveri glad you were here.” will thought that her face look just as itdid when she first shook hand with him in rome; for her widow’s cap,fix in her bonnet, had gone off with it, and he could see that shehad late been shed tear. but the mixtur of anger in heragit had vanish at the sight of him; she had been us, whenthei were face to face, alwai to feel confid and the happi freedomwhich come with mutual understand, and how could other peopl’sword hinder that effect on a sudden? let the music which can takepossess of our frame and fill the air with joi for us, sound oncemor—what doe it signifi that we heard it found fault with in itsabs?“i have sent a letter to lowick manor to-dai, ask leav to see you,”said will, seat himself opposit to her. “i am go awayimmedi, and i could not go without speak to you again.”“i thought we had part when you came to lowick mani week ago—youthought you were go then,” said dorothea, her voic trembl alittl.“ye; but i wa in ignor then of thing which i know now—thingswhich have alter my feel about the futur. when i saw you befor,i wa dream that i might come back some dai. i don’t think i evershal—now.” will paus here.“you wish me to know the reason?” said dorothea, timidli.“ye,” said will, impetu, shake hi head backward, and lookingawai from her with irrit in hi face. “of cours i must wish it. ihav been grossli insult in your ey and in the ey of other.there ha been a mean implic against my charact. i wish you toknow that under no circumst would i have lower myself by—underno circumst would i have given men the chanc of sai that isought monei under the pretext of seek—someth els. there wa none of other safeguard against me—the safeguard of wealth wa enough.”will rose from hi chair with the last word and went—he hardli knewwher; but it wa to the project window nearest him, which had beenopen as now about the same season a year ago, when he and dorothea hadstood within it and talk togeth. her whole heart wa go out atthi moment in sympathi with will’s indign: she onli want toconvinc him that she had never done him injustic, and he seem tohav turn awai from her as if she too had been part of the unfriendlyworld.“it would be veri unkind of you to suppos that i ever attribut anymean to you,” she began. then in her ardent wai, want to pleadwith him, she move from her chair and went in front of him to her oldplac in the window, sai, “do you suppos that i ever disbeliev inyou?”when will saw her there, he gave a start and move backward out of thewindow, without meet her glanc. dorothea wa hurt by thi movementfollow up the previou anger of hi tone. she wa readi to sai thatit wa as hard on her as on him, and that she wa helpless; but thosestrang particular of their relat which neither of them couldexplicitli mention kept her alwai in dread of sai too much. at thismoment she had no belief that will would in ani case have want tomarri her, and she fear us word which might impli such a belief.she onli said earnestli, recur to hi last word—“i am sure no safeguard wa ever need against you.”will did not answer. in the stormi fluctuat of hi feel theseword of her seem to him cruelli neutral, and he look pale andmiser after hi angri outburst. he went to the tabl and fastenedup hi portfolio, while dorothea look at him from the distanc. theywer wast these last moment togeth in wretch silenc. whatcould he sai, sinc what had got obstin uppermost in hi mind wasth passion love for her which he forbad himself to utter? whatcould she sai, sinc she might offer him no help—sinc she wa forcedto keep the monei that ought to have been hi?—sinc to-dai he seemednot to respond as he us to do to her thorough trust and like?but will at last turn awai from hi portfolio and approach thewindow again.“i must go,” he said, with that peculiar look of the ey whichsometim accompani bitter feel, as if thei had been tire andburn with gaze too close at a light.“what shall you do in life?” said dorothea, timidli. “have yourintent remain just the same as when we said good-by befor?”“ye,” said will, in a tone that seem to waiv the subject asuninterest. “i shall work awai at the first thing that offer. isuppos on get a habit of do without happi or hope.”“oh, what sad word!” said dorothea, with a danger tendenc to sob.then try to smile, she ad, “we us to agre that we were alikein speak too strongli.”“i have not spoken too strongli now,” said will, lean back againstth angl of the wall. “there ar certain thing which a man can onlygo through onc in hi life; and he must know some time or other thatth best is over with him. thi experi ha happen to me while iam veri young—that is all. what i care more for than i can ever carefor anyth els is absolut forbidden to me—i don’t mean mere bybe out of my reach, but forbidden me, even if it were within myreach, by my own pride and honor—by everyth i respect myself for. ofcours i shall go on live as a man might do who had seen heaven in atranc.”will paus, imagin that it would be imposs for dorothea tomisunderstand thi; inde he felt that he wa contradict himselfand offend against hi self-approv in speak to her so plainli;but still—it could not be fairli call woo a woman to tell her thath would never woo her. it must be admit to be a ghostli kind ofwoo.but dorothea’s mind wa rapidli go over the past with quit anothervis than hi. the thought that she herself might be what will mostcar for did throb through her an instant, but then came doubt: thememori of the littl thei had live through togeth turn pale andshrank befor the memori which suggest how much fuller might havebeen the intercours between will and some on els with whom he hadhad constant companionship. everyth he had said might refer to thatoth relat, and whatev had pass between him and herself wasthoroughli explain by what she had alwai regard as their simplefriendship and the cruel obstruct thrust upon it by her husband’sinjuri act. dorothea stood silent, with her ey cast down dreamili,while imag crowd upon her which left the sicken certainti thatwil wa refer to mr. lydgat. but why sicken? he want her toknow that here too hi conduct should be abov suspicion.will wa not surpris at her silenc. hi mind also wa tumultuouslybusi while he watch her, and he wa feel rather wildli thatsometh must happen to hinder their part—some miracl, clearlynoth in their own deliber speech. yet, after all, had she anylov for him?—he could not pretend to himself that he would ratherbeliev her to be without that pain. he could not deni that a secretlong for the assur that she love him wa at the root of all hisword.neither of them knew how long thei stood in that wai. dorothea wasrais her ey, and wa about to speak, when the door open and herfootman came to sai—“the hors ar readi, madam, whenev you like to start.”“present,” said dorothea. then turn to will, she said, “i havesom memoranda to write for the housekeep.”“i must go,” said will, when the door had close again—advancingtoward her. “the dai after to-morrow i shall leav middlemarch.”“you have act in everi wai rightli,” said dorothea, in a low tone,feel a pressur at her heart which made it difficult to speak.she put out her hand, and will took it for an instant without speak,for her word had seem to him cruelli cold and unlik herself. theirey met, but there wa discont in hi, and in her there wa onlysad. he turn awai and took hi portfolio under hi arm.“i have never done you injustic. pleas rememb me,” said dorothea,repress a rise sob.“why should you sai that?” said will, with irrit. “as if i werenot in danger of forget everyth els.”he had realli a movement of anger against her at that moment, and itimpel him to go awai without paus. it wa all on flash todorothea—hi last word—hi distant bow to her as he reach thedoor—the sens that he wa no longer there. she sank into the chair,and for a few moment sat like a statu, while imag and emot werehurri upon her. joi came first, in spite of the threaten trainbehind it—joi in the impress that it wa realli herself whom willlov and wa renounc, that there wa realli no other love lesspermiss, more blameworthi, which honor wa hurri him awai from.thei were part all the same, but—dorothea drew a deep breath and felther strength return—she could think of him unrestrainedli. at thatmoment the part wa easi to bear: the first sens of love andb love exclud sorrow. it wa as if some hard ici pressur hadmelt, and her conscious had room to expand: her past wa comeback to her with larger interpret. the joi wa not theless—perhap it wa the more complet just then—becaus of theirrevoc part; for there wa no reproach, no contemptu wonderto imagin in ani ey or from ani lip. he had act so as to defyreproach, and make wonder respect.ani on watch her might have seen that there wa a fortifyingthought within her. just as when invent power is work with gladeas some small claim on the attent is fulli met as if it were onlya cranni open to the sunlight, it wa easi now for dorothea to writeh memoranda. she spoke her last word to the housekeep in cheerfulton, and when she seat herself in the carriag her ey were brightand her cheek bloom under the dismal bonnet. she threw back theheavi “weeper,” and look befor her, wonder which road will hadtaken. it wa in her natur to be proud that he wa blameless, andthrough all her feel there ran thi vein—“i wa right to defendhim.”the coachman wa us to drive hi grai at a good pace, mr. casaubonb unenjoi and impati in everyth awai from hi desk, andwant to get to the end of all journei; and dorothea wa now bowledalong quickli. drive wa pleasant, for rain in the night had laid thedust, and the blue sky look far off, awai from the region of thegreat cloud that sail in mass. the earth look like a happi placeund the vast heaven, and dorothea wa wish that she mightovertak will and see him onc more.after a turn of the road, there he wa with the portfolio under hisarm; but the next moment she wa pass him while he rais hi hat,and she felt a pang at be seat there in a sort of exalt,leav him behind. she could not look back at him. it wa as if acrowd of indiffer object had thrust them asund, and forc themalong differ path, take them farther and farther awai from eachoth, and make it useless to look back. she could no more make anysign that would seem to sai, “need we part?” than she could stop thecarriag to wait for him. nai, what a world of reason crowd upon heragainst ani movement of her thought toward a futur that might reverseth decis of thi dai!“i onli wish i had known befor—i wish he knew—then we could be quitehappi in think of each other, though we ar forev part. and if icould but have given him the monei, and made thing easier forhim!”—were the long that came back the most persist. and yet,so heavili did the world weigh on her in spite of her independentenergi, that with thi idea of will as in need of such help and at adisadvantag with the world, there came alwai the vision of thatunfitting of ani closer relat between them which lai in theopinion of everi on connect with her. she felt to the full all theimper of the motiv which urg will’s conduct. how could hedream of her defi the barrier that her husband had place betweenthem?—how could she ever sai to herself that she would defi it?will’s certainti as the carriag grew smaller in the distanc, had muchmor bitter in it. veri slight matter were enough to gall him inhi sensit mood, and the sight of dorothea drive past him while hefelt himself plod along as a poor devil seek a posit in aworld which in hi present temper offer him littl that he covet,made hi conduct seem a mere matter of necess, and took awai thesustain of resolv. after all, he had no assur that she lovedhim: could ani man pretend that he wa simpli glad in such a case tohav the suffer all on hi own side?that even will spent with the lydgat; the next even he wasgon.book vii.two temptat.chapter lxiii.these littl thing ar great to littl man.—goldsmith.“have you seen much of your scientif phoenix, lydgat, late?” saidmr. toller at on of hi christma dinner-parti, speak to mr.farebroth on hi right hand.“not much, i am sorri to sai,” answer the vicar, accustom to parrymr. toller’s banter about hi belief in the new medic light. “i amout of the wai and he is too busi.”“is he? i am glad to hear it,” said dr. minchin, with mingl suavityand surpris.“he give a great deal of time to the new hospit,” said mr.farebroth, who had hi reason for continu the subject: “i hear ofthat from my neighbor, mr. casaubon, who goe there often. she sayslydg is indefatig, and is make a fine thing of bulstrod’sinstitut. he is prepar a new ward in case of the cholera comingto us.”“and prepar theori of treatment to try on the patient, isuppos,” said mr. toller.“come, toller, be candid,” said mr. farebroth. “you ar too clevernot to see the good of a bold fresh mind in medicin, as well as ineveryth els; and as to cholera, i fanci, none of you ar veri surewhat you ought to do. if a man goe a littl too far along a new road,it is usual himself that he harm more than ani on els.”“i am sure you and wrench ought to be oblig to him,” said dr.minchin, look toward toller, “for he ha sent you the cream ofpeacock’s patient.”“lydgat ha been live at a great rate for a young beginn,” saidmr. harri toller, the brewer. “i suppos hi relat in the northback him up.”“i hope so,” said mr. chich, “els he ought not to have marri thatnic girl we were all so fond of. hang it, on ha a grudg against aman who carri off the prettiest girl in the town.”“ay, by god! and the best too,” said mr. standish.“my friend vinci didn’t half like the marriag, i know that,” said mr.chich. “_he_ wouldn’t do much. how the relat on the other sidemai have come down i can’t sai.” there wa an emphat kind ofretic in mr. chich’s manner of speak.“oh, i shouldn’t think lydgat ever look to practic for a live,”said mr. toller, with a slight touch of sarcasm, and there the subjectwa drop.thi wa not the first time that mr. farebroth had heard hint oflydg’s expens be obvious too great to be met by hi practic,but he thought it not unlik that there were resourc orexpect which excus the larg outlai at the time of lydgat’smarriag, and which might hinder ani bad consequ from thedisappoint in hi practic. on even, when he took the pain togo to middlemarch on purpos to have a chat with lydgat as of old, henot in him an air of excit effort quit unlik hi usual easi wayof keep silenc or break it with abrupt energi whenev he hadanyth to sai. lydgat talk persist when thei were in hiswork-room, put argument for and against the probabl of certainbiolog view; but he had none of those definit thing to sai or toshow which give the waymark of a patient uninterrupt pursuit, sucha he us himself to insist on, sai that “there must be a systoleand diastol in all inquiri,” and that “a man’s mind must becontinu expand and shrink between the whole human horizon andth horizon of an object-glass.” that even he seem to be talkingwid for the sake of resist ani person bear; and befor longthei went into the draw room, where lydgat, have ask rosamondto give them music, sank back in hi chair in silenc, but with astrang light in hi ey. “he mai have been take an opiat,” wa athought that cross mr. farebroth’s mind—“tic-douloureux perhap—ormed worri.”it did not occur to him that lydgat’s marriag wa not delight: hebeliev, as the rest did, that rosamond wa an amiabl, docilecreatur, though he had alwai thought her rather uninterest—alittl too much the pattern-card of the finish-school; and hismoth could not forgiv rosamond becaus she never seem to see thathenrietta nobl wa in the room. “howev, lydgat fell in love withher,” said the vicar to himself, “and she must be to hi tast.”mr. farebroth wa awar that lydgat wa a proud man, but have verylittl correspond fibr in himself, and perhap too littl careabout person digniti, except the digniti of not be mean orfoolish, he could hardli allow enough for the wai in which lydgateshrank, as from a burn, from the utter of ani word about hispriv affair. and soon after that convers at mr. toller’s, thevicar learn someth which made him watch the more eagerli for anopportun of indirectli let lydgat know that if he want toopen himself about ani difficulti there wa a friendli ear readi.the opportun came at mr. vinci’s, where, on new year’s dai, therewa a parti, to which mr. farebroth wa irresist invit, on theplea that he must not forsak hi old friend on the first new year ofhi be a greater man, and rector as well as vicar. and thi partywa thoroughli friendli: all the ladi of the farebroth famili werepres; the vinci children all dine at the tabl, and fred hadpersuad hi mother that if she did not invit mari garth, thefarebroth would regard it as a slight to themselv, mari beingtheir particular friend. mari came, and fred wa in high spirit,though hi enjoy wa of a checker kind—triumph that hi mothershould see mari’s import with the chief personag in the partyb much streak with jealousi when mr. farebroth sat down by her.fred us to be much more easi about hi own accomplish in thedai when he had not begun to dread be “bowl out by farebroth,”and thi terror wa still befor him. mr. vinci, in her fullestmatronli bloom, look at mari’s littl figur, rough wavi hair, andvisag quit without lili and rose, and wonder; tryingunsuccessfulli to fanci herself care about mari’s appear inwed cloth, or feel complac in grandchildren who would“featur” the garth. howev, the parti wa a merri on, and mari wasparticularli bright; be glad, for fred’s sake, that hi friend wereget kinder to her, and be also quit will that thei shouldse how much she wa valu by other whom thei must admit to bejudg.mr. farebroth notic that lydgat seem bore, and that mr. vincyspok as littl as possibl to hi son-in-law. rosamond wa perfectlygrac and calm, and onli a subtl observ such as the vicar hadnot been rous to bestow on her would have perceiv the total absenceof that interest in her husband’s presenc which a love wife is sureto betrai, even if etiquett keep her aloof from him. when lydgat wastak part in the convers, she never look toward him ani morethan if she had been a sculptur psych model to look anoth wai:and when, after be call out for an hour or two, he re-enter theroom, she seem unconsci of the fact, which eighteen month beforewould have had the effect of a numer befor cipher. in realiti,howev, she wa intens awar of lydgat’s voic and movement; andher pretti good-temper air of unconsci wa a studi negationbi which she satisfi her inward opposit to him without compromiseof proprieti. when the ladi were in the draw-room after lydgatehad been call awai from the dessert, mr. farebroth, when rosamondhappen to be near her, said—“you have to give up a great deal of yourhusband’s societi, mr. lydgat.”“ye, the life of a medic man is veri arduou: especi when he isso devot to hi profess as mr. lydgat is,” said rosamond, who wasstand, and move easili awai at the end of thi correct littlespeech.“it is dreadfulli dull for her when there is no compani,” said mr.vinci, who wa seat at the old ladi’s side. “i am sure i thought sowhen rosamond wa ill, and i wa stai with her. you know, mr.farebroth, our is a cheer hous. i am of a cheer dispositionmyself, and mr. vinci alwai like someth to be go on. that iswhat rosamond ha been us to. veri differ from a husband out atodd hour, and never know when he will come home, and of a close,proud disposit, _i_ think”—indiscreet mr. vinci did lower her toneslightli with thi parenthesi. “but rosamond alwai had an angel of atemp; her brother us veri often not to pleas her, but she wasnev the girl to show temper; from a babi she wa alwai as good asgood, and with a complexion beyond anyth. but my children ar allgood-temper, thank god.”thi wa easili credibl to ani on look at mr. vinci as she threwback her broad cap-string, and smile toward her three littl girl,ag from seven to eleven. but in that smile glanc she wa obligedto includ mari garth, whom the three girl had got into a corner tomak her tell them stori. mari wa just finish the delici taleof rumpelstiltskin, which she had well by heart, becaus letti wasnev tire of commun it to her ignor elder from a favorit volum. louisa, mr. vinci’s darl, now ran to her with wide-eyedseri excit, cry, “oh mamma, mamma, the littl man stamp sohard on the floor he couldn’t get hi leg out again!”“bless you, my cherub!” said mamma; “you shall tell me all about itto-morrow. go and listen!” and then, as her ey follow louisa backtoward the attract corner, she thought that if fred wish her toinvit mari again she would make no object, the children be sopleas with her.but present the corner becam still more anim, for mr.farebroth came in, and seat himself behind louisa, took her on hislap; whereupon the girl all insist that he must hearrumpelstiltskin, and mari must tell it over again. he insist too, andmari, without fuss, began again in her neat fashion, with precis thesam word as befor. fred, who had also seat himself near, wouldhav felt unmix triumph in mari’s effect if mr. farebrotherhad not been look at her with evid admir, while hedramat an intens interest in the tale to pleas the children.“you will never care ani more about my on-ei giant, loo,” said fredat the end.“ye, i shall. tell about him now,” said louisa.“oh, i dare sai; i am quit cut out. ask mr. farebroth.”“ye,” ad mari; “ask mr. farebroth to tell you about the antswhos beauti hous wa knock down by a giant name tom, and hethought thei didn’t mind becaus he couldn’t hear them cry, or see themus their pocket-handkerchief.”“pleas,” said louisa, look up at the vicar.“no, no, i am a grave old parson. if i try to draw a stori out of mybag a sermon come instead. shall i preach you a sermon?” said he,put on hi short-sight glass, and purs up hi lip.“ye,” said louisa, falteringli.“let me see, then. against cake: how cake ar bad thing, especiallyif thei ar sweet and have plum in them.”louisa took the affair rather serious, and got down from the vicar’sknee to go to fred.“ah, i see it will not do to preach on new year’s dai,” said mr.farebroth, rise and walk awai. he had discov of late thatfr had becom jealou of him, and also that he himself wa not losinghi prefer for mari abov all other women.“a delight young person is miss garth,” said mr. farebroth, whohad been watch her son’s movement.“ye,” said mr. vinci, oblig to repli, as the old ladi turn to herexpectantli. “it is a piti she is not better-look.”“i cannot sai that,” said mr. farebroth, decis. “i like hercounten. we must not alwai ask for beauti, when a good god hasseen fit to make an excel young woman without it. i put goodmann first, and miss garth will know how to conduct herself in anyst.”the old ladi wa a littl sharp in her tone, have a prospectiverefer to mari’s becom her daughter-in-law; for there wa thisinconveni in mari’s posit with regard to fred, that it wa notsuit to be made public, and henc the three ladi at lowickparsonag were still hope that camden would choos miss garth.new visitor enter, and the draw-room wa given up to music andgam, while whist-tabl were prepar in the quiet room on the othersid of the hall. mr. farebroth plai a rubber to satisfi hismoth, who regard her occasion whist as a protest against scandaland novelti of opinion, in which light even a revok had it digniti.but at the end he got mr. chich to take hi place, and left theroom. as he cross the hall, lydgat had just come in and wa takingoff hi great-coat.“you ar the man i wa go to look for,” said the vicar; and insteadof enter the draw-room, thei walk along the hall and stoodagainst the fireplac, where the frosti air help to make a glowingbank. “you see, i can leav the whist-tabl easili enough,” he went on,smile at lydgat, “now i don’t plai for monei. i ow that to you,mr. casaubon sai.”“how?” said lydgat, coldli.“ah, you didn’t mean me to know it; i call that ungener retic.you should let a man have the pleasur of feel that you have donehim a good turn. i don’t enter into some peopl’s dislik of beingund an oblig: upon my word, i prefer be under an obligationto everybodi for behav well to me.”“i can’t tell what you mean,” said lydgat, “unless it is that i oncespok of you to mr. casaubon. but i did not think that she would breakher promis not to mention that i had done so,” said lydgat, leaninghi back against the corner of the mantel-piec, and show noradi in hi face.“it wa brook who let it out, onli the other dai. he paid me thecompli of sai that he wa veri glad i had the live though youhad come across hi tactic, and had prais me up as a ken and atillotson, and that sort of thing, till mr. casaubon would hear of noon els.”“oh, brook is such a leaki-mind fool,” said lydgat, contemptu.“well, i wa glad of the leaki then. i don’t see why you shouldn’tlike me to know that you wish to do me a servic, my dear fellow. andyou certainli have done me on. it’s rather a strong check to on’sself-complac to find how much of on’s right do depend on notb in want of monei. a man will not be tempt to sai the lord’sprayer backward to pleas the devil, if he doesn’t want the devil’sservic. i have no need to hang on the smile of chanc now.”“i don’t see that there’s ani monei-get without chanc,” saidlydg; “if a man get it in a profess, it’s pretti sure to come bychanc.”mr. farebroth thought he could account for thi speech, in strikingcontrast with lydgat’s former wai of talk, as the pervers whichwil often spring from the moodi of a man ill at eas in hisaffair. he answer in a tone of good-humor admiss—“ah, there’s enorm patienc want with the wai of the world. but iti the easier for a man to wait patient when he ha friend who lovehim, and ask for noth better than to help him through, so far as itli in their power.”“oh ye,” said lydgat, in a careless tone, chang hi attitud andlook at hi watch. “peopl make much more of their difficulti thanthei need to do.”he knew as distinctli as possibl that thi wa an offer of help tohimself from mr. farebroth, and he could not bear it. so strangelydetermin ar we mortal, that, after have been long gratifi withth sens that he had privat done the vicar a servic, thesuggest that the vicar discern hi need of a servic in returnmad him shrink into unconquer retic. besid, behind allmak of such offer what els must come?—that he should “mention hiscas,” impli that he want specif thing. at that moment, suicideseem easier.mr. farebroth wa too keen a man not to know the mean of thatrepli, and there wa a certain massiv in lydgat’s manner andton, correspond with hi physiqu, which if he repel youradv in the first instanc seem to put persuas devic out ofquest.“what time ar you?” said the vicar, devour hi wound feel.“after eleven,” said lydgat. and thei went into the draw-room.chapter lxiv.1_st gent_. where li the power, there let the blame lie too.2_d gent_. nai, power is rel; you cannot fright the come pest with border fortress, or catch your carp with subtl argument. all forc is twain in on: caus is not caus unless effect be there; and action’s self must need contain a passiv. so command exist but with obedi.even if lydgat had been inclin to be quit open about hi affair,he knew that it would have hardli been in mr. farebroth’s power togiv him the help he immedi want. with the year’s bill comingin from hi tradesmen, with dover’s threaten hold on hi furnitur,and with noth to depend on but slow dribbl payment from patientswho must not be offend—for the handsom fee he had had from freshitthal and lowick manor had been easili absorb—noth less than athousand pound would have freed him from actual embarrass, andleft a residu which, accord to the favorit phrase of hopefulnessin such circumst, would have given him “time to look about him.”natur, the merri christma bring the happi new year, whenfellow-citizen expect to be paid for the troubl and good thei havesmilingli bestow on their neighbor, had so tighten the pressur ofsordid care on lydgat’s mind that it wa hardli possibl for him tothink unbrokenli of ani other subject, even the most habitu andsolicit. he wa not an ill-temper man; hi intellectu activ,the ardent kind of hi heart, as well as hi strong frame, wouldalwai, under toler easi condit, have kept him abov the pettyuncontrol suscept which make bad temper. but he wa now aprei to that worst irrit which aris not simpli from annoy,but from the second conscious underli those annoy, ofwast energi and a degrad preoccup, which wa the revers ofal hi former purpos. “_thi_ is what i am think of; and _that_is what i might have been think of,” wa the bitter incess murmurwithin him, make everi difficulti a doubl goad to impati.some gentlemen have made an amaz figur in literatur by generaldiscont with the univers as a trap of dul into which theirgreat soul have fallen by mistak; but the sens of a stupend selfand an insignific world mai have it consol. lydgat’sdiscont wa much harder to bear: it wa the sens that there wa agrand exist in thought and effect action ly around him, whilehi self wa be narrow into the miser isol of egoisticfear, and vulgar anxieti for event that might allai such fear. histroubl will perhap appear miser sordid, and beneath theattent of lofti person who can know noth of debt except on amagnific scale. doubtless thei were sordid; and for the major,who ar not lofti, there is no escap from sordid but by be freefrom monei-crave, with all it base hope and temptat, itswatch for death, it hint request, it hors-dealer’s desir tomak bad work pass for good, it seek for function which ought to beanoth’s, it compuls often to long for luck in the shape of a widecalam.it wa becaus lydgat writh under the idea of get hi neckbeneath thi vile yoke that he had fallen into a bitter moodi statewhich wa continu widen rosamond’s alien from him. afterth first disclosur about the bill of sale, he had made mani effortsto draw her into sympathi with him about possibl measur fornarrow their expens, and with the threaten approach ofchristma hi proposit grew more and more definit. “we two can dowith onli on servant, and live on veri littl,” he said, “and i shallmanag with on hors.” for lydgat, as we have seen, had begun toreason, with a more distinct vision, about the expens of live, andani share of pride he had given to appear of that sort wa meagrecompar with the pride which made him revolt from exposur as adebtor, or from ask men to help him with their monei.“of cours you can dismiss the other two servant, if you like,” saidrosamond; “but i should have thought it would be veri injuri to yourposit for us to live in a poor wai. you must expect your practic tobe lower.”“my dear rosamond, it is not a question of choic. we have begun tooexpens. peacock, you know, live in a much smaller hous thanthi. it is my fault: i ought to have known better, and i deserv athrash—if there were anybodi who had a right to give it me—forbring you into the necess of live in a poorer wai than you havebeen us to. but we marri becaus we love each other, i suppos.and that mai help us to pull along till thing get better. come, dear,put down that work and come to me.”he wa realli in chill gloom about her at that moment, but he dread afutur without affect, and wa determin to resist the oncom ofdivis between them. rosamond obei him, and he took her on hiskne, but in her secret soul she wa utterli aloof from him. the poorth saw onli that the world wa not order to her like, andlydg wa part of that world. but he held her waist with on hand andlaid the other gentli on both of her; for thi rather abrupt man hadmuch tender in hi manner toward women, seem to have alwayspres in hi imagin the weak of their frame and thedel pois of their health both in bodi and mind. and he beganagain to speak persuas.“i find, now i look into thing a littl, rosi, that it is wonderfulwhat an amount of monei slip awai in our housekeep. i suppos theserv ar careless, and we have had a great mani peopl come. butther must be mani in our rank who manag with much less: thei must dowith common thing, i suppos, and look after the scrap. it seem,monei goe but a littl wai in these matter, for wrench ha everythinga plain as possibl, and he ha a veri larg practic.”“oh, if you think of live as the wrench do!” said rosamond, with alittl turn of her neck. “but i have heard you express your disgust atthat wai of live.”“ye, thei have bad tast in everyth—thei make economi look ugli. weneedn’t do that. i onli meant that thei avoid expens, although wrenchha a capit practic.”“why should not you have a good practic, tertiu? mr. peacock had. youshould be more care not to offend peopl, and you should send outmedicin as the other do. i am sure you began well, and you gotsever good hous. it cannot answer to be eccentr; you should thinkwhat will be gener like,” said rosamond, in a decid littl toneof admonit.lydgat’s anger rose: he wa prepar to be indulg toward feminineweak, but not toward feminin dictat. the shallow of awaternixi’s soul mai have a charm until she becom didact. but hecontrol himself, and onli said, with a touch of despot firm—“what i am to do in my practic, rosi, it is for me to judg. that isnot the question between us. it is enough for you to know that ourincom is like to be a veri narrow on—hardli four hundr, perhapsless, for a long time to come, and we must try to re-arrang our livesin accord with that fact.”rosamond wa silent for a moment or two, look befor her, and thensaid, “my uncl bulstrod ought to allow you a salari for the time yougiv to the hospit: it is not right that you should work fornoth.”“it wa understood from the begin that my servic would begratuit. that, again, need not enter into our discuss. i havepoint out what is the onli probabl,” said lydgat, impati.then check himself, he went on more quietli—“i think i see on resourc which would free us from a good deal of thepres difficulti. i hear that young ned plymdal is go to bemarri to miss sophi toller. thei ar rich, and it is not often that agood hous is vacant in middlemarch. i feel sure that thei would beglad to take thi hous from us with most of our furnitur, and theywould be will to pai handsom for the leas. i can emploi trumbullto speak to plymdal about it.”rosamond left her husband’s knee and walk slowli to the other end ofth room; when she turn round and walk toward him it wa evidentthat the tear had come, and that she wa bite her under-lip andclasp her hand to keep herself from cry. lydgat waswretch—shaken with anger and yet feel that it would be unmanli tovent the anger just now.“i am veri sorri, rosamond; i know thi is pain.”“i thought, at least, when i had born to send the plate back and havethat man take an inventori of the furnitur—i should have thought_that_ would suffic.”“i explain it to you at the time, dear. that wa onli a secur andbehind that secur there is a debt. and that debt must be paid withinth next few month, els we shall have our furnitur sold. if youngplymdal will take our hous and most of our furnitur, we shall beabl to pai that debt, and some other too, and we shall be quit of aplac too expens for us. we might take a smaller hous: trumbul, iknow, ha a veri decent on to let at thirti pound a-year, and thi isnineti.” lydgat utter thi speech in the curt hammer wai withwhich we usual try to nail down a vagu mind to imper fact.tear roll silent down rosamond’s cheek; she just press herhandkerchief against them, and stood look at the larg vase on themantel-piec. it wa a moment of more intens bitter than she hadev felt befor. at last she said, without hurri and with carefulemphasi—“i never could have believ that you would like to act in that wai.”“like it?” burst out lydgat, rise from hi chair, thrust hishand in hi pocket and stalk awai from the hearth; “it’s not aquest of like. of cours, i don’t like it; it’s the onli thing ican do.” he wheel round there, and turn toward her.“i should have thought there were mani other mean than that,” saidrosamond. “let us have a sale and leav middlemarch altogeth.”“to do what? what is the us of my leav my work in middlemarch to gowher i have none? we should be just as penniless elsewher as we areher,” said lydgat still more angrili.“if we ar to be in that posit it will be entir your own do,tertiu,” said rosamond, turn round to speak with the fullestconvict. “you will not behav as you ought to do to your own famili.you offend captain lydgat. sir godwin wa veri kind to me when wewer at quallingham, and i am sure if you show proper regard to himand told him your affair, he would do anyth for you. but ratherthan that, you like give up our hous and furnitur to mr. nedplymdal.”there wa someth like fierc in lydgat’s ey, as he answeredwith new violenc, “well, then, if you will have it so, i do like it. iadmit that i like it better than make a fool of myself by go tobeg where it’s of no us. understand then, that it is what i _like todo._”there wa a tone in the last sentenc which wa equival to theclutch of hi strong hand on rosamond’s delic arm. but for all that,hi will wa not a whit stronger than her. she immedi walk outof the room in silenc, but with an intens determin to hinderwhat lydgat like to do.he went out of the hous, but as hi blood cool he felt that thechief result of the discuss wa a deposit of dread within him at theidea of open with hi wife in futur subject which might again urgehim to violent speech. it wa as if a fractur in delic crystal hadbegun, and he wa afraid of ani movement that might make it fatal. hismarriag would be a mere piec of bitter ironi if thei could not go onlov each other. he had long ago made up hi mind to what he thoughtwa her neg charact—her want of sensibl, which show itselfin disregard both of hi specif wish and of hi gener aim. thefirst great disappoint had been born: the tender devoted anddocil ador of the ideal wife must be renounc, and life must betaken up on a lower stage of expect, as it is by men who have losttheir limb. but the real wife had not onli her claim, she had still ahold on hi heart, and it wa hi intens desir that the hold shouldremain strong. in marriag, the certainti, “she will never love memuch,” is easier to bear than the fear, “i shall love her no more.”henc, after that outburst, hi inward effort wa entir to excuseh, and to blame the hard circumst which were partli hi fault.he tri that even, by pet her, to heal the wound he had made inth morn, and it wa not in rosamond’s natur to be repel orsulki; inde, she welcom the sign that her husband love her andwa under control. but thi wa someth quit distinct from love_him_. lydgat would not have chosen soon to recur to the plan ofpart with the hous; he wa resolv to carri it out, and sai aslittl more about it as possibl. but rosamond herself touch on it atbreakfast by sai, mildli—“have you spoken to trumbul yet?”“no,” said lydgat, “but i shall call on him as i go by thi morn.no time must be lost.” he took rosamond’s question as a sign that shewithdrew her inward opposit, and kiss her head caressingli when hegot up to go awai.as soon as it wa late enough to make a call, rosamond went to mr.plymdal, mr. ned’s mother, and enter with pretti congratulationsinto the subject of the come marriag. mr. plymdal’s matern viewwa, that rosamond might possibl now have retrospect glimps ofher own folli; and feel the advantag to be at present all on thesid of her son, wa too kind a woman not to behav gracious.“ye, ned is most happi, i must sai. and sophi toller is all i coulddesir in a daughter-in-law. of cours her father is abl to dosometh handsom for her—that is onli what would be expect with abreweri like hi. and the connect is everyth we should desir.but that is not what i look at. she is such a veri nice girl—no air,no pretens, though on a level with the first. i don’t mean with thetitl aristocraci. i see veri littl good in peopl aim out oftheir own sphere. i mean that sophi is equal to the best in the town,and she is content with that.”“i have alwai thought her veri agreeabl,” said rosamond.“i look upon it as a reward for ned, who never held hi head too high,that he should have got into the veri best connect,” continu mr.plymdal, her nativ sharp soften by a fervid sens that she wastak a correct view. “and such particular peopl as the toller ar,thei might have object becaus some of our friend ar not their. iti well known that your aunt bulstrod and i have been intim fromour youth, and mr. plymdal ha been alwai on mr. bulstrod’s side.and i myself prefer seriou opinion. but the toller have welcom nedal the same.”“i am sure he is a veri deserv, well-principl young man,” saidrosamond, with a neat air of patronag in return for mr. plymdal’swholesom correct.“oh, he ha not the style of a captain in the armi, or that sort ofcarriag as if everybodi wa beneath him, or that showi kind oftalk, and sing, and intellectu talent. but i am thank he hasnot. it is a poor prepar both for here and hereaft.”“oh dear, ye; appear have veri littl to do with happi,” saidrosamond. “i think there is everi prospect of their be a happycoupl. what hous will thei take?”“oh, as for that, thei must put up with what thei can get. thei havebeen look at the hous in st. peter’s place, next to mr. hackbutt’s;it belong to him, and he is put it nice in repair. i supposethei ar not like to hear of a better. inde, i think ned willdecid the matter to-dai.”“i should think it is a nice hous; i like st. peter’s place.”“well, it is near the church, and a genteel situat. but the windowsar narrow, and it is all up and down. you don’t happen to know ofani other that would be at liberti?” said mr. plymdal, fix herround black ey on rosamond with the anim of a sudden thought inthem.“oh no; i hear so littl of those thing.”rosamond had not foreseen that question and answer in set out topai her visit; she had simpli meant to gather ani inform whichwould help her to avert the part with her own hous undercircumst thoroughli disagre to her. as to the untruth in herrepli, she no more reflect on it than she did on the untruth therewa in her sai that appear had veri littl to do withhappi. her object, she wa convinc, wa thoroughli justifi:it wa lydgat whose intent wa inexcus; and there wa a plan inher mind which, when she had carri it out fulli, would prove how veryfals a step it would have been for him to have descend from hisposit.she return home by mr. borthrop trumbul’s offic, mean to callther. it wa the first time in her life that rosamond had thought ofdo anyth in the form of busi, but she felt equal to theoccas. that she should be oblig to do what she intens dislik,wa an idea which turn her quiet tenac into activ invent. herewa a case in which it could not be enough simpli to disobei and beseren, placidli obstin: she must act accord to her judgment,and she said to herself that her judgment wa right—“inde, if it hadnot been, she would not have wish to act on it.”mr. trumbul wa in the back-room of hi offic, and receiv rosamondwith hi finest manner, not onli becaus he had much sensibl toher charm, but becaus the good-natur fibr in him wa stir byhi certainti that lydgat wa in difficulti, and that thisuncommonli pretti woman—thi young ladi with the highest personalattract—wa like to feel the pinch of troubl—to find herselfinvolv in circumst beyond her control. he beg her to do himth honor to take a seat, and stood befor her trim and comportinghimself with an eager solicitud, which wa chiefli benevol.rosamond’s first question wa, whether her husband had call on mr.trumbul that morn, to speak about dispos of their hous.“ye, ma’am, ye, he did; he did so,” said the good auction, tryingto throw someth sooth into hi iter. “i wa about to fulfilhi order, if possibl, thi afternoon. he wish me not toprocrastin.”“i call to tell you not to go ani further, mr. trumbul; and i beg ofyou not to mention what ha been said on the subject. will you obligem?”“certainli i will, mr. lydgat, certainli. confid is sacr withm on busi or ani other topic. i am then to consid the commissionwithdrawn?” said mr. trumbul, adjust the long end of hi bluecravat with both hand, and look at rosamond deferenti.“ye, if you pleas. i find that mr. ned plymdal ha taken a hous—theon in st. peter’s place next to mr. hackbutt’s. mr. lydgat would beannoi that hi order should be fulfil uselessli. and besidesthat, there ar other circumst which render the proposalunnecessari.”“veri good, mr. lydgat, veri good. i am at your command, whenevery requir ani servic of me,” said mr. trumbul, who felt pleasur inconjectur that some new resourc had been open. “reli on me, ibeg. the affair shall go no further.”that even lydgat wa a littl comfort by observ that rosamondwa more live than she had usual been of late, and even seemedinterest in do what would pleas him without be ask. hethought, “if she will be happi and i can rub through, what doe it allsignifi? it is onli a narrow swamp that we have to pass in a longjournei. if i can get my mind clear again, i shall do.”he wa so much cheer that he began to search for an account ofexperi which he had long ago meant to look up, and had neglectedout of that creep self-despair which come in the train of pettyanxieti. he felt again some of the old delight absorpt in afar-reach inquiri, while rosamond plai the quiet music which wasa help to hi medit as the plash of an oar on the eveninglak. it wa rather late; he had push awai all the book, and waslook at the fire with hi hand clasp behind hi head inforget of everyth except the construct of a newcontrol experi, when rosamond, who had left the piano and waslean back in her chair watch him, said—“mr. ned plymdal ha taken a hous alreadi.”lydgat, startl and jar, look up in silenc for a moment, like aman who ha been disturb in hi sleep. then flush with anunpleas conscious, he ask—“how do you know?”“i call at mr. plymdal’s thi morn, and she told me that he hadtaken the hous in st. peter’s place, next to mr. hackbutt’s.”lydgat wa silent. he drew hi hand from behind hi head and pressedthem against the hair which wa hang, as it wa apt to do, in a masson hi forehead, while he rest hi elbow on hi knee. he wasfeel bitter disappoint, as if he had open a door out of asuffoc place and had found it wall up; but he also felt surethat rosamond wa pleas with the caus of hi disappoint. hepref not look at her and not speak, until he had got overth first spasm of vexat. after all, he said in hi bitter, whatcan a woman care about so much as hous and furnitur? a husbandwithout them is an absurd. when he look up and push hi hairasid, hi dark ey had a miser blank non-expect of sympathyin them, but he onli said, coolli—“perhap some on els mai turn up. i told trumbul to be on thelook-out if he fail with plymdal.”rosamond made no remark. she trust to the chanc that noth morewould pass between her husband and the auction until some issueshould have justifi her interfer; at ani rate, she had hinderedth event which she immedi dread. after a paus, she said—“how much monei is it that those disagre peopl want?”“what disagre peopl?”“those who took the list—and the other. i mean, how much monei wouldsatisfi them so that you need not be troubl ani more?”lydgat survei her for a moment, as if he were look for symptom,and then said, “oh, if i could have got six hundr from plymdal forfurnitur and as premium, i might have manag. i could have paid offdov, and given enough on account to the other to make them waitpati, if we contract our expens.”“but i mean how much should you want if we stai in thi hous?”“more than i am like to get anywher,” said lydgat, with rather agrat sarcasm in hi tone. it anger him to perceiv that rosamond’smind wa wander over impractic wish instead of face possibleeffort.“why should you not mention the sum?” said rosamond, with a mildind that she did not like hi manner.“well,” said lydgat in a guess tone, “it would take at least athousand to set me at eas. but,” he ad, incis, “i have toconsid what i shall do without it, not with it.”rosamond said no more.but the next dai she carri out her plan of write to sir godwinlydg. sinc the captain’s visit, she had receiv a letter from him,and also on from mr. mengan, hi marri sister, condol with heron the loss of her babi, and express vagu the hope that theyshould see her again at quallingham. lydgat had told her that thispolit meant noth; but she wa secretli convinc that anybackward in lydgat’s famili toward him wa due to hi cold andcontemptu behavior, and she had answer the letter in her mostcharm manner, feel some confid that a specif invitationwould follow. but there had been total silenc. the captain evidentlywa not a great penman, and rosamond reflect that the sister mighthav been abroad. howev, the season wa come for think of friendsat home, and at ani rate sir godwin, who had chuck her under thechin, and pronounc her to be like the celebr beauti, mr. croli,who had made a conquest of him in 1790, would be touch by ani appealfrom her, and would find it pleasant for her sake to behav as he oughtto do toward hi nephew. rosamond wa naiv convinc of what an oldgentleman ought to do to prevent her from suffer annoy. and shewrot what she consid the most judici letter possibl—on whichwould strike sir godwin as a proof of her excel sens—point outhow desir it wa that tertiu should quit such a place asmiddlemarch for on more fit to hi talent, how the unpleasantcharact of the inhabit had hinder hi profession success, andhow in consequ he wa in monei difficulti, from which it wouldrequir a thousand pound thoroughli to extric him. she did not saythat tertiu wa unawar of her intent to write; for she had theidea that hi suppos sanction of her letter would be in accordancewith what she did sai of hi great regard for hi uncl godwin as therel who had alwai been hi best friend. such wa the forc ofpoor rosamond’s tactic now she appli them to affair.thi had happen befor the parti on new year’s dai, and no answer hadyet come from sir godwin. but on the morn of that dai lydgat had tolearn that rosamond had revok hi order to borthrop trumbul. feelingit necessari that she should be gradual accustom to the idea oftheir quit the hous in lowick gate, he overcam hi reluct tospeak to her again on the subject, and when thei were breakfastingsaid—“i shall try to see trumbul thi morn, and tell him to advertiseth hous in the ‘pioneer’ and the ‘trumpet.’ if the thing wereadvertis, some on might be inclin to take it who would nototherwis have thought of a chang. in these countri place mani peoplego on in their old hous when their famili ar too larg for them,for want of know where thei can find anoth. and trumbul seem tohav got no bite at all.”rosamond knew that the inevit moment wa come. “i order trumbullnot to inquir further,” she said, with a care calm which wasevid defens.lydgat stare at her in mute amaz. onli half an hour befor hehad been fasten up her plait for her, and talk the “littlelanguag” of affect, which rosamond, though not return it,accept as if she had been a seren and love imag, now and thenmiracul dimpl toward her votari. with such fibr still astirin him, the shock he receiv could not at onc be distinctli anger; itwa confus pain. he laid down the knife and fork with which he wascarv, and throw himself back in hi chair, said at last, with acool ironi in hi tone—“mai i ask when and why you did so?”“when i knew that the plymdal had taken a hous, i call to tell himnot to mention our to them; and at the same time i told him not to letth affair go on ani further. i knew that it would be veri injuri toyou if it were known that you wish to part with your hous andfurnitur, and i had a veri strong object to it. i think that wasreason enough.”“it wa of no consequ then that i had told you imper reasonsof anoth kind; of no consequ that i had come to a differentconclus, and given an order accordingli?” said lydgat, bitingli,the thunder and lightn gather about hi brow and ey.the effect of ani on’s anger on rosamond had alwai been to make hershrink in cold dislik, and to becom all the more calmli correct, inth convict that she wa not the person to misbehav whatev othersmight do. she repli—“i think i had a perfect right to speak on a subject which concern meat least as much as you.”“clearli—you had a right to speak, but onli to me. you had no right tocontradict my order secretli, and treat me as if i were a fool,” saidlydg, in the same tone as befor. then with some ad scorn, “is itposs to make you understand what the consequ will be? is it ofani us for me to tell you again why we must try to part with thehous?”“it is not necessari for you to tell me again,” said rosamond, in avoic that fell and trickl like cold water-drop. “i rememb whatyou said. you spoke just as violent as you do now. but that doe notalt my opinion that you ought to try everi other mean rather thantak a step which is so pain to me. and as to advertis the hous,i think it would be perfectli degrad to you.”“and suppos i disregard your opinion as you disregard mine?”“you can do so, of cours. but i think you ought to have told me beforew were marri that you would place me in the worst posit, ratherthan give up your own will.”lydgat did not speak, but toss hi head on on side, and twitchedth corner of hi mouth in despair. rosamond, see that he wa notlook at her, rose and set hi cup of coffe befor him; but he tookno notic of it, and went on with an inward drama and argument,occasion move in hi seat, rest on arm on the tabl, andrub hi hand against hi hair. there wa a conflux of emot andthought in him that would not let him either give thorough wai to hisang or persever with simpl rigid of resolv. rosamond tookadvantag of hi silenc.“when we were marri everyon felt that your posit wa veri high. icould not have imagin then that you would want to sell our furnitur,and take a hous in bride street, where the room ar like cage. if wear to live in that wai let us at least leav middlemarch.”“these would be veri strong consider,” said lydgat, halfiron—still there wa a wither pale about hi lip as helook at hi coffe, and did not drink—“these would be veri strongconsider if i did not happen to be in debt.”“mani person must have been in debt in the same wai, but if thei arerespect, peopl trust them. i am sure i have heard papa sai thatth torbit were in debt, and thei went on veri well. it cannot be goodto act rashli,” said rosamond, with seren wisdom.lydgat sat paralyz by oppos impuls: sinc no reason he couldappli to rosamond seem like to conquer her assent, he want tosmash and grind some object on which he could at least produc animpress, or els to tell her brutal that he wa master, and shemust obei. but he not onli dread the effect of such extrem ontheir mutual life—he had a grow dread of rosamond’s quiet elusiveobstinaci, which would not allow ani assert of power to be final;and again, she had touch him in a spot of keenest feel by implyingthat she had been delud with a fals vision of happi in marryinghim. as to sai that he wa master, it wa not the fact. the veryresolut to which he had wrought himself by dint of logic andhonor pride wa begin to relax under her torpedo contact. heswallow half hi cup of coffe, and then rose to go.“i mai at least request that you will not go to trumbul atpres—until it ha been seen that there ar no other mean,” saidrosamond. although she wa not subject to much fear, she felt it safernot to betrai that she had written to sir godwin. “promis me that youwil not go to him for a few week, or without tell me.”lydgat gave a short laugh. “i think it is i who should exact a promisethat you will do noth without tell me,” he said, turn hi eyessharpli upon her, and then move to the door.“you rememb that we ar go to dine at papa’s,” said rosamond,wish that he should turn and make a more thorough concess to her.but he onli said “oh ye,” impati, and went awai. she held it tobe veri odiou in him that he did not think the pain proposit hehad had to make to her were enough, without show so unpleas atemp. and when she put the moder request that he would defer goingto trumbul again, it wa cruel in him not to assur her of what hemeant to do. she wa convinc of her have act in everi wai for thebest; and each grate or angri speech of lydgat’s serv onli as anaddit to the regist of offenc in her mind. poor rosamond formonth had begun to associ her husband with feel ofdisappoint, and the terribl inflex relat of marriag hadlost it charm of encourag delight dream. it had freed her fromth disagre of her father’s hous, but it had not given hereveryth that she had wish and hope. the lydgat with whom she hadbeen in love had been a group of airi condit for her, most of whichhad disappear, while their place had been taken by everi-dai detailswhich must be live through slowli from hour to hour, not floatedthrough with a rapid select of favor aspect. the habit oflydg’s profess, hi home preoccup with scientif subject,which seem to her almost like a morbid vampir’s tast, hi peculiarview of thing which had never enter into the dialogu ofcourtship—all these continu alien influenc, even without thefact of hi have place himself at a disadvantag in the town, andwithout that first shock of revel about dover’s debt, would havemad hi presenc dull to her. there wa anoth presenc which eversinc the earli dai of her marriag, until four month ago, had beenan agreeabl excit, but that wa gone: rosamond would not confessto herself how much the consequ blank had to do with her utterennui; and it seem to her (perhap she wa right) that an invitationto quallingham, and an open for lydgat to settl elsewher than inmiddlemarch—in london, or somewher like to be free fromunpleas—would satisfi her quit well, and make her indifferentto the absenc of will ladislaw, toward whom she felt some resentmentfor hi exalt of mr. casaubon.that wa the state of thing with lydgat and rosamond on the newyear’s dai when thei dine at her father’s, she look mildli neutraltoward him in remembr of hi ill-temper behavior at breakfast,and he carri a much deeper effect from the inward conflict in whichthat morn scene wa onli on of mani epoch. hi flush effortwhil talk to mr. farebroth—hi effort after the cynic pretencethat all wai of get monei ar essenti the same, and thatchanc ha an empir which reduc choic to a fool’s illus—wa butth symptom of a waver resolv, a benumb respons to the oldstimuli of enthusiasm.what wa he to do? he saw even more keenli than rosamond did thedreari of take her into the small hous in bride street, wheresh would have scanti furnitur around her and discont within: alif of privat and life with rosamond were two imag which hadbecom more and more irreconcil ever sinc the threat of privationhad disclos itself. but even if hi resolv had forc the twoimag into combin, the us preliminari to that hard changewer not visibl within reach. and though he had not given the promisewhich hi wife had ask for, he did not go again to trumbul. he evenbegan to think of take a rapid journei to the north and see sirgodwin. he had onc believ that noth would urg him into make anappl for monei to hi uncl, but he had not then known the fullpressur of altern yet more disagre. he could not depend onth effect of a letter; it wa onli in an interview, howeverdisagre thi might be to himself, that he could give a thoroughexplan and could test the effect of kinship. no sooner hadlydg begun to repres thi step to himself as the easiest thanther wa a reaction of anger that he—he who had long ago determin toliv aloof from such abject calcul, such self-interest anxietyabout the inclin and the pocket of men with whom he had beenproud to have no aim in common—should have fallen not simpli to theirlevel, but to the level of solicit them.chapter lxv.on of us two must bowen douteless,and, sith a man is more reasonablethan woman is, ye [men] most be suffrabl.—chaucer: _canterburi tale_.the bia of human natur to be slow in correspond triumph evenov the present quicken in the gener pace of thing: what wonderthen that in 1832 old sir godwin lydgat wa slow to write a letterwhich wa of consequ to other rather than to himself? nearli threeweek of the new year were gone, and rosamond, await an answer toher win appeal, wa everi dai disappoint. lydgat, in totalignor of her expect, wa see the bill come in, andfeel that dover’s us of hi advantag over other creditor wasimmin. he had never mention to rosamond hi brood purpos ofgo to quallingham: he did not want to admit what would appear to hera concess to her wish after indign refus, until the lastmoment; but he wa realli expect to set off soon. a slice of therailwai would enabl him to manag the whole journei and back in fourdai.but on morn after lydgat had gone out, a letter came address tohim, which rosamond saw clearli to be from sir godwin. she wa full ofhop. perhap there might be a particular note to her enclos; butlydg wa natur address on the question of monei or other aid,and the fact that he wa written to, nai, the veri delai in write atal, seem to certifi that the answer wa thoroughli compliant. shewa too much excit by these thought to do anyth but lightstitch in a warm corner of the dine-room, with the outsid of thismoment letter ly on the tabl befor her. about twelv she heardher husband’s step in the passag, and trip to open the door, shesaid in her lightest tone, “tertiu, come in here—here is a letter foryou.”“ah?” he said, not take off hi hat, but just turn her roundwithin hi arm to walk toward the spot where the letter lai. “my unclegodwin!” he exclaim, while rosamond reseat herself, and watch hima he open the letter. she had expect him to be surpris.while lydgat’s ey glanc rapidli over the brief letter, she saw hisfac, usual of a pale brown, take on a dry white; with nostrilsand lip quiver he toss down the letter befor her, and saidviol—“it will be imposs to endur life with you, if you will alwai beact secretli—act in opposit to me and hide your action.”he check hi speech and turn hi back on her—then wheel round andwalk about, sat down, and got up again restlessli, grasp hard theobject deep down in hi pocket. he wa afraid of sai somethingirremedi cruel.rosamond too had chang color as she read. the letter ran in thiswai:—“dear tertiu,—don’t set your wife to write to me when you haveanyth to ask. it is a roundabout wheedl sort of thing which ishould not have credit you with. i never choos to write to a womanon matter of busi. as to my suppli you with a thousand pound,or onli half that sum, i can do noth of the sort. my own familydrain me to the last penni. with two younger son and three daughter,i am not like to have cash to spare. you seem to have got throughyour own monei pretti quickli, and to have made a mess where you ar;the sooner you go somewher els the better. but i have noth to dowith men of your profess, and can’t help you there. i did the best icould for you as guardian, and let you have your own wai in take tomedicin. you might have gone into the armi or the church. your moneywould have held out for that, and there would have been a surer ladderbefor you. your uncl charl ha had a grudg against you for notgo into hi profess, but not i. i have alwai wish you well,but you must consid yourself on your own leg entir now.your affection uncl,godwin lydgat.”when rosamond had finish read the letter she sat quit still, withher hand fold befor her, restrain ani show of her keendisappoint, and intrench herself in quiet passiv under herhusband’s wrath. lydgat paus in hi movement, look at her again,and said, with bite sever—“will thi be enough to convinc you of the harm you mai do by secretmeddl? have you sens enough to recogn now your incompet tojudg and act for me—to interfer with your ignor in affair whichit belong to me to decid on?”the word were hard; but thi wa not the first time that lydgat hadbeen frustrat by her. she did not look at him, and made no repli.“i had nearli resolv on go to quallingham. it would have cost mepain enough to do it, yet it might have been of some us. but it hasbeen of no us for me to think of anyth. you have alwai beencounteract me secretli. you delud me with a fals assent, and theni am at the merci of your devic. if you mean to resist everi wish iexpress, sai so and defi me. i shall at least know what i am doingthen.”it is a terribl moment in young live when the close of love’sbond ha turn to thi power of gall. in spite of rosamond’sself-control a tear fell silent and roll over her lip. she stillsaid noth; but under that quietud wa hidden an intens effect: shewa in such entir disgust with her husband that she wish she hadnev seen him. sir godwin’s rude toward her and utter want offeel rang him with dover and all other creditor—disagreeablepeopl who onli thought of themselv, and did not mind how annoyingthei were to her. even her father wa unkind, and might have done morefor them. in fact there wa but on person in rosamond’s world whom shedid not regard as blameworthi, and that wa the grace creatur withblond plait and with littl hand cross befor her, who had neverexpress herself unbecomingli, and had alwai act for the best—thebest natur be what she best like.lydgat paus and look at her began to feel that half-maddeningsens of helpless which come over passion peopl when theirpass is met by an innoc-look silenc whose meek victim airseem to put them in the wrong, and at last infect even the justestindign with a doubt of it justic. he need to recov the fullsens that he wa in the right by moder hi word.“can you not see, rosamond,” he began again, try to be simpli graveand not bitter, “that noth can be so fatal as a want of open andconfid between us? it ha happen again and again that i haveexpress a decid wish, and you have seem to assent, yet after thatyou have secretli disobei my wish. in that wai i can never know whati have to trust to. there would be some hope for us if you would admitthi. am i such an unreason, furiou brute? why should you not beopen with me?” still silenc.“will you onli sai that you have been mistaken, and that i mai dependon your not act secretli in futur?” said lydgat, urgent, butwith someth of request in hi tone which rosamond wa quick toperc. she spoke with cool.“i cannot possibl make admiss or promis in answer to such wordsa you have us toward me. i have not been accustom to languag ofthat kind. you have spoken of my ‘secret meddl,’ and my ‘interferingignor,’ and my ‘fals assent.’ i have never express myself inthat wai to you, and i think that you ought to apolog. you spoke ofit be imposs to live with me. certainli you have not made mylif pleasant to me of late. i think it wa to be expect that ishould try to avert some of the hardship which our marriag hasbrought on me.” anoth tear fell as rosamond ceas speak, and shepress it awai as quietli as the first.lydgat flung himself into a chair, feel checkmat. what place wasther in her mind for a remonstr to lodg in? he laid down hi hat,flung an arm over the back of hi chair, and look down for somemo without speak. rosamond had the doubl purchas over him ofinsens to the point of justic in hi reproach, and ofsens to the undeni hardship now present in her marriedlif. although her duplic in the affair of the hous had exceededwhat he knew, and had realli hinder the plymdal from know of it,she had no conscious that her action could rightli be call fals.we ar not oblig to identifi our own act accord to a strictclassif, ani more than the materi of our groceri and cloth.rosamond felt that she wa aggriev, and that thi wa what lydgatehad to recogn.as for him, the need of accommod himself to her natur, which wasinflex in proport to it negat, held him as with pincer. hehad begun to have an alarm foresight of her irrevoc loss of lovefor him, and the consequ dreari of their life. the readi fulnessof hi emot made thi dread altern quickli with the firstviol movement of hi anger. it would assuredli have been a vainboast in him to sai that he wa her master.“you have not made my life pleasant to me of late”—“the hardship whichour marriag ha brought on me”—these word were sting hisimagin as a pain make an exagger dream. if he were not onlyto sink from hi highest resolv, but to sink into the hideousfett of domest hate?“rosamond,” he said, turn hi ey on her with a melancholi look,“you should allow for a man’s word when he is disappoint andprovok. you and i cannot have opposit interest. i cannot part myhappi from your. if i am angri with you, it is that you seem notto see how ani conceal divid us. how could i wish to makeanyth hard to you either by my word or conduct? when i hurt you, ihurt part of my own life. i should never be angri with you if you wouldb quit open with me.”“i have onli wish to prevent you from hurri us into wretchednesswithout ani necess,” said rosamond, the tear come again from asoften feel now that her husband had soften. “it is so veri hardto be disgrac here among all the peopl we know, and to live in sucha miser wai. i wish i had di with the babi.”she spoke and wept with that gentl which make such word andtear omnipot over a love-heart man. lydgat drew hi chair nearto her and press her delic head against hi cheek with hispow tender hand. he onli caress her; he did not sai anyth;for what wa there to sai? he could not promis to shield her from thedread wretched, for he could see no sure mean of do so. whenh left her to go out again, he told himself that it wa ten timeshard for her than for him: he had a life awai from home, and constantapp to hi activ on behalf of other. he wish to excuseeveryth in her if he could—but it wa inevit that in thatexcus mood he should think of her as if she were an anim ofanoth and feebler speci. nevertheless she had master him.chapter lxvi.’ti on thing to be tempt, escalu,anoth thing to fall.—_measur for measur_.lydgat certainli had good reason to reflect on the servic hispractic did him in counteract hi person care. he had no longerfre energi enough for spontan research and specul think,but by the bedsid of patient, the direct extern call on hisjudg and sympathi brought the ad impuls need to draw himout of himself. it wa not simpli that benefic har of routinewhich enabl silli men to live respect and unhappi men to livecalmli—it wa a perpetu claim on the immedi fresh applic ofthought, and on the consider of anoth’s need and trial. mani ofu look back through life would sai that the kindest man we haveev known ha been a medic man, or perhap that surgeon whose finetact, direct by deepli inform percept, ha come to us in ourne with a more sublim benefic than that of miracl-worker. someof that twice-bless merci wa alwai with lydgat in hi work at thehospit or in privat hous, serv better than ani opiat to quietand sustain him under hi anxieti and hi sens of mental degeneraci.mr. farebroth’s suspicion as to the opiat wa true, howev. underth first gall pressur of foreseen difficulti, and the firstpercept that hi marriag, if it were not to be a yoke loneli,must be a state of effort to go on love without too much care aboutb love, he had onc or twice tri a dose of opium. but he had nohereditari constitut crave after such transient escap from thehaunt of miseri. he wa strong, could drink a great deal of wine,but did not care about it; and when the men round him were drinkingspirit, he took sugar and water, have a contemptu piti even forth earliest stage of excit from drink. it wa the same withgambl. he had look on at a great deal of gambl in pari,watch it as if it had been a diseas. he wa no more tempt by suchwin than he wa by drink. he had said to himself that the onlywin he care for must be attain by a consciou process of high,difficult combin tend toward a benefic result. the power helong for could not be repres by agit finger clutch aheap of coin, or by the half-barbar, half-idiot triumph in theey of a man who sweep within hi arm the ventur of twentychapfallen companion.but just as he had tri opium, so hi thought now began to turn upongambl—not with appetit for it excit, but with a sort ofwist inward gaze after that easi wai of get monei, which impliedno ask and brought no respons. if he had been in london orpari at that time, it is probabl that such thought, second byopportun, would have taken him into a gambl-hous, no longer towatch the gambler, but to watch with them in kindr eager.repugn would have been surmount by the immens need to win, ifchanc would be kind enough to let him. an incid which happen notveri long after that airi notion of get aid from hi uncl had beenexclud, wa a strong sign of the effect that might have follow anyext opportun of gambl.the billiard-room at the green dragon wa the constant resort of acertain set, most of whom, like our acquaint mr. bambridg, wereregard as men of pleasur. it wa here that poor fred vinci had madepart of hi memor debt, have lost monei in bet, and beenoblig to borrow of that gai companion. it wa gener known inmiddlemarch that a good deal of monei wa lost and won in thi wai; andth consequ reput of the green dragon as a place of dissipationnatur heighten in some quarter the temptat to go there.probabl it regular visit, like the initi of freemasonri,wish that there were someth a littl more tremend to keep tothemselv concern it; but thei were not a close commun, andmani decent senior as well as junior occasion turn into thebilliard-room to see what wa go on. lydgat, who had the muscularaptitud for billiard, and wa fond of the game, had onc or twice inth earli dai after hi arriv in middlemarch taken hi turn with thecu at the green dragon; but afterward he had no leisur for the game,and no inclin for the social there. on even, howev, hehad occas to seek mr. bambridg at that resort. the horsedeal hadengag to get him a custom for hi remain good hors, for whichlydg had determin to substitut a cheap hack, hope by thisreduct of style to get perhap twenti pound; and he care now foreveri small sum, as a help toward feed the patienc of histradesmen. to run up to the billiard-room, as he wa pass, wouldsav time.mr. bambridg wa not yet come, but would be sure to arriv by-and-by,said hi friend mr. horrock; and lydgat stai, plai a game for thesak of pass the time. that even he had the peculiar light in theey and the unusu vivac which had been onc notic in him by mr.farebroth. the except fact of hi presenc wa much notic inth room, where there wa a good deal of middlemarch compani; andsever looker-on, as well as some of the player, were bet withanim. lydgat wa plai well, and felt confid; the bet weredrop round him, and with a swift glanc thought of the probablegain which might doubl the sum he wa save from hi hors, he beganto bet on hi own plai, and won again and again. mr. bambridg had comein, but lydgat did not notic him. he wa not onli excit with hisplai, but vision were gleam on him of go the next dai tobrass, where there wa gambl on a grander scale to be had, andwher, by on power snatch at the devil’s bait, he might carri itoff without the hook, and bui hi rescu from hi daili solicit.he wa still win when two new visitor enter. on of them wa ayoung hawlei, just come from hi law studi in town, and the other wasfr vinci, who had spent sever even of late at thi old haunt ofhi. young hawlei, an accomplish billiard-player, brought a coolfresh hand to the cue. but fred vinci, startl at see lydgat, andastonish to see him bet with an excit air, stood asid, andkept out of the circl round the tabl.fred had been reward resolut by a littl laxiti of late. he hadbeen work heartili for six month at all outdoor occup undermr. garth, and by dint of sever practic had nearli master thedefect of hi handwrit, thi practic be, perhap, a littl theless sever that it wa often carri on in the even at mr. garth’sunder the ey of mari. but the last fortnight mari had been stai atlowick parsonag with the ladi there, dure mr. farebroth’sresid in middlemarch, where he wa carri out some parochialplan; and fred, not see anyth more agreeabl to do, had turnedinto the green dragon, partli to plai at billiard, partli to tast theold flavor of discours about hors, sport, and thing in gener,consid from a point of view which wa not strenuous correct. hehad not been out hunt onc thi season, had had no hors of hi ownto ride, and had gone from place to place chiefli with mr. garth in hisgig, or on the sober cob which mr. garth could lend him. it wa alittl too bad, fred began to think, that he should be kept in thetrac with more sever than if he had been a clergyman. “i will tellyou what, mistress mari—it will be rather harder work to learnsurvei and draw plan than it would have been to write sermon,”he had said, wish her to appreci what he went through for hersak; “and as to hercul and theseu, thei were noth to me. theyhad sport, and never learn to write a bookkeep hand.” and now,mari be out of the wai for a littl while, fred, like ani otherstrong dog who cannot slip hi collar, had pull up the stapl of hischain and made a small escap, not of cours mean to go fast or far.there could be no reason why he should not plai at billiard, but hewa determin not to bet. as to monei just now, fred had in hi mindth heroic project of save almost all of the eighti pound that mr.garth offer him, and return it, which he could easili do by givingup all futil monei-spend, sinc he had a superflu stock ofcloth, and no expens in hi board. in that wai he could, in oneyear, go a good wai toward repai the nineti pound of which he haddepriv mr. garth, unhappili at a time when she need that sum morethan she did now. nevertheless, it must be acknowledg that on thiseven, which wa the fifth of hi recent visit to the billiard-room,fred had, not in hi pocket, but in hi mind, the ten pound which hemeant to reserv for himself from hi half-year’s salari (have beforehim the pleasur of carri thirti to mr. garth when mari wa likelyto be come home again)—he had those ten pound in hi mind as a fundfrom which he might risk someth, if there were a chanc of a goodbet. why? well, when sovereign were fly about, why shouldn’t hecatch a few? he would never go far along that road again; but a manlik to assur himself, and men of pleasur gener, what he coulddo in the wai of mischief if he chose, and that if he abstain frommak himself ill, or beggar himself, or talk with the utmostloos which the narrow limit of human capac will allow, it isnot becaus he is a spoonei. fred did not enter into formal reason,which ar a veri artifici, inexact wai of repres the tinglingreturn of old habit, and the capric of young blood: but there waslurk in him a prophet sens that even, that when he began toplai he should also begin to bet—that he should enjoi somepunch-drink, and in gener prepar himself for feel “ratherseedi” in the morn. it is in such indefin movement that actionoften begin.but the last thing like to have enter fred’s expect wa thath should see hi brother-in-law lydgat—of whom he had never quitedrop the old opinion that he wa a prig, and tremend consciousof hi superior—look excit and bet, just as he himselfmight have done. fred felt a shock greater than he could quit accountfor by the vagu knowledg that lydgat wa in debt, and that hisfath had refus to help him; and hi own inclin to enter intoth plai wa suddenli check. it wa a strang revers of attitud:fred’s blond face and blue ey, usual bright and careless, readi togiv attent to anyth that held out a promis of amus,look involuntarili grave and almost embarrass as if by the sightof someth unfit; while lydgat, who had habitu an air ofself-possess strength, and a certain medit that seem toli behind hi most observ attent, wa act, watch, speakingwith that excit narrow conscious which remind on of an animalwith fierc ey and retractil claw.lydgat, by bet on hi own stroke, had won sixteen pound; butyoung hawlei’s arriv had chang the pois of thing. he madefirst-rate stroke himself, and began to bet against lydgat’s stroke,the strain of whose nerv wa thu chang from simpl confid inhi own movement to defi anoth person’s doubt in them. thedefi wa more excit than the confid, but it wa less sure.he continu to bet on hi own plai, but began often to fail. still hewent on, for hi mind wa as utterli narrow into that precipitouscrevic of plai as if he had been the most ignor lounger there. fredobserv that lydgat wa lose fast, and found himself in the newsitu of puzzl hi brain to think of some devic by which,without be offens, he could withdraw lydgat’s attent, andperhap suggest to him a reason for quit the room. he saw thatoth were observ lydgat’s strang unlik to himself, and itoccur to him that mere to touch hi elbow and call him asid for amoment might rous him from hi absorpt. he could think of nothingclever than the dare improb of sai that he want to seerosi, and wish to know if she were at home thi even; and he wasgo desper to carri out thi weak devic, when a waiter came upto him with a messag, sai that mr. farebroth wa below, andbeg to speak with him.fred wa surpris, not quit comfort, but send word that hewould be down immedi, he went with a new impuls up to lydgat,said, “can i speak to you a moment?” and drew him asid.“farebroth ha just sent up a messag to sai that he want to speakto me. he is below. i thought you might like to know he wa there, ifyou had anyth to sai to him.”fred had simpli snatch up thi pretext for speak, becaus he couldnot sai, “you ar lose confoundedli, and ar make everybodi stareat you; you had better come awai.” but inspir could hardli haveserv him better. lydgat had not befor seen that fred wa present,and hi sudden appear with an announc of mr. farebroth hadth effect of a sharp concuss.“no, no,” said lydgat; “i have noth particular to sai to him.but—the game is up—i must be go—i came in just to see bambridg.”“bambridg is over there, but he is make a row—i don’t think he’sreadi for busi. come down with me to farebroth. i expect he isgo to blow me up, and you will shield me,” said fred, with someadroit.lydgat felt shame, but could not bear to act as if he felt it, byrefus to see mr. farebroth; and he went down. thei mere shookhand, howev, and spoke of the frost; and when all three had turnedinto the street, the vicar seem quit will to sai good-by tolydg. hi present purpos wa clearli to talk with fred alon, andh said, kindli, “i disturb you, young gentleman, becaus i have somepress busi with you. walk with me to st. botolph’s, will you?”it wa a fine night, the sky thick with star, and mr. farebrotherpropos that thei should make a circuit to the old church by thelondon road. the next thing he said wa—“i thought lydgat never went to the green dragon?”“so did i,” said fred. “but he said that he went to see bambridg.”“he wa not plai, then?”fred had not meant to tell thi, but he wa oblig now to sai, “ye,he wa. but i suppos it wa an accident thing. i have never seen himther befor.”“you have been go often yourself, then, late?”“oh, about five or six time.”“i think you had some good reason for give up the habit of goingther?”“ye. you know all about it,” said fred, not like to be catechis inthi wai. “i made a clean breast to you.”“i suppos that give me a warrant to speak about the matter now. it isunderstood between us, is it not?—that we ar on a foot of openfriendship: i have listen to you, and you will be will to listento me. i mai take my turn in talk a littl about myself?”“i am under the deepest oblig to you, mr. farebroth,” said fred,in a state of uncomfort surmis.“i will not affect to deni that you ar under some oblig to me.but i am go to confess to you, fred, that i have been tempt torevers all that by keep silenc with you just now. when somebodysaid to me, ‘young vinci ha taken to be at the billiard-tabl everynight again—he won’t bear the curb long;’ i wa tempt to do theopposit of what i am do—to hold my tongu and wait while you wentdown the ladder again, bet first and then—”“i have not made ani bet,” said fred, hastili.“glad to hear it. but i sai, my prompt wa to look on and see youtak the wrong turn, wear out garth’s patienc, and lose the bestopportun of your life—the opportun which you made some ratherdifficult effort to secur. you can guess the feel which rais thattempt in me—i am sure you know it. i am sure you know that thesatisfact of your affect stand in the wai of mine.”there wa a paus. mr. farebroth seem to wait for a recognit ofth fact; and the emot percept in the tone of hi fine voicegav solemn to hi word. but no feel could quell fred’s alarm.“i could not be expect to give her up,” he said, after a moment’shesit: it wa not a case for ani pretenc of generos.“clearli not, when her affect met your. but relat of thi sort,even when thei ar of long stand, ar alwai liabl to chang. i caneasili conceiv that you might act in a wai to loosen the tie she feelstoward you—it must be rememb that she is onli condition boundto you—and that in that case, anoth man, who mai flatter himself thath ha a hold on her regard, might succe in win that firm placein her love as well as respect which you had let slip. i can easilyconc such a result,” repeat mr. farebroth, emphat. “therei a companionship of readi sympathi, which might get the advantageeven over the longest associ.” it seem to fred that if mr.farebroth had had a beak and talon instead of hi veri capabletongu, hi mode of attack could hardli be more cruel. he had ahorr convict that behind all thi hypothet statement there wasa knowledg of some actual chang in mari’s feel.“of cours i know it might easili be all up with me,” he said, in atroubl voic. “if she is begin to compar—” he broke off, notlik to betrai all he felt, and then said, by the help of a littlebitt, “but i thought you were friendli to me.”“so i am; that is why we ar here. but i have had a strong dispositionto be otherwis. i have said to myself, ‘if there is a likelihood ofthat youngster do himself harm, why should you interfer? aren’t youworth as much as he is, and don’t your sixteen year over and abovehi, in which you have gone rather hungri, give you more right tosatisfact than he ha? if there’s a chanc of hi go to the dog,let him—perhap you could nohow hinder it—and do you take thebenefit.’”there wa a paus, in which fred wa seiz by a most uncomfortablechil. what wa come next? he dread to hear that someth had beensaid to mari—he felt as if he were listen to a threat rather than awarn. when the vicar began again there wa a chang in hi tone liketh encourag transit to a major kei.“but i had onc meant better than that, and i am come back to my oldintent. i thought that i could hardli _secur myself_ in it better,fred, than by tell you just what had gone on in me. and now, do youunderstand me? i want you to make the happi of her life and yourown, and if there is ani chanc that a word of warn from me mai turnasid ani risk to the contrari—well, i have utter it.”there wa a drop in the vicar’s voic when he spoke the last word. hepaus—thei were stand on a patch of green where the road divergedtoward st. botolph’s, and he put out hi hand, as if to impli that theconvers wa close. fred wa move quit newli. some on highlysuscept to the contempl of a fine act ha said, that itproduc a sort of regener shudder through the frame, and makeson feel readi to begin a new life. a good degre of that effect wasjust then present in fred vinci.“i will try to be worthi,” he said, break off befor he could sai“of you as well as of her.” and meanwhil mr. farebroth had gatheredth impuls to sai someth more.“you must not imagin that i believ there is at present ani declin inher prefer of you, fred. set your heart at rest, that if you keepright, other thing will keep right.”“i shall never forget what you have done,” fred answer. “i can’t sayanyth that seem worth sai—onli i will try that your goodnessshal not be thrown awai.”“that’s enough. good-by, and god bless you.”in that wai thei part. but both of them walk about a long whilebefor thei went out of the starlight. much of fred’s rumin mightb sum up in the word, “it certainli would have been a fine thingfor her to marri farebroth—but if she love me best and i am a goodhusband?”perhap mr. farebroth’s might be concentr into a singl shrug andon littl speech. “to think of the part on littl woman can plai inth life of a man, so that to renounc her mai be a veri good imitationof heroism, and to win her mai be a disciplin!”chapter lxvii.now is there civil war within the soul:resolv is thrust from off the sacr thronebi clamor need, and pride the grand-viziermak humbl compact, plai the suppl partof envoi and deft-tongu apologistfor hungri rebel.happili lydgat had end by lose in the billiard-room, and broughtawai no encourag to make a raid on luck. on the contrari, he feltunmix disgust with himself the next dai when he had to pai four orfiv pound over and abov hi gain, and he carri about with him amost unpleas vision of the figur he had made, not onli rubbingelbow with the men at the green dragon but behav just as thei did.a philosoph fallen to bet is hardli distinguish from aphilistin under the same circumst: the differ will chiefli befound in hi subsequ reflect, and lydgat chew a verydisagre cud in that wai. hi reason told him how the affair mighthav been magnifi into ruin by a slight chang of sceneri—if it hadbeen a gambl-hous that he had turn into, where chanc could beclutch with both hand instead of be pick up with thumb andfor-finger. nevertheless, though reason strangl the desir togambl, there remain the feel that, with an assur of luck toth need amount, he would have like to gambl, rather than take thealtern which wa begin to urg itself as inevit.that altern wa to appli to mr. bulstrod. lydgat had so manytim boast both to himself and other that he wa totallyindepend of bulstrod, to whose plan he had lent himself solelybecaus thei enabl him to carri out hi own idea of professionalwork and public benefit—he had so constantli in their personalintercours had hi pride sustain by the sens that he wa make agood social us of thi predomin banker, whose opinion he thoughtcontempt and whose motiv often seem to him an absurd mixtur ofcontradictori impress—that he had been creat for himself strongid obstacl to the proffer of ani consider request to him onhi own account.still, earli in march hi affair were at that pass in which men beginto sai that their oath were deliv in ignor, and to perceivethat the act which thei had call imposs to them is becomingmanifestli possibl. with dover’s ugli secur soon to be put inforc, with the proce of hi practic immedi absorb in payingback debt, and with the chanc, if the worst were known, of dailysuppli be refus on credit, abov all with the vision ofrosamond’s hopeless discont continu haunt him, lydgat hadbegun to see that he should inevit bend himself to ask help fromsomebodi or other. at first he had consid whether he should writeto mr. vinci; but on question rosamond he found that, as he hadsuspect, she had alreadi appli twice to her father, the last timeb sinc the disappoint from sir godwin; and papa had said thatlydg must look out for himself. “papa said he had come, with on badyear after anoth, to trade more and more on borrow capit, and hadhad to give up mani indulg; he could not spare a singl hundredfrom the charg of hi famili. he said, let lydgat ask bulstrod:thei have alwai been hand and glove.”inde, lydgat himself had come to the conclus that if he must endbi ask for a free loan, hi relat with bulstrod, more at leastthan with ani other man, might take the shape of a claim which wa notpur person. bulstrod had indirectli help to caus the failureof hi practic, and had also been highli gratifi by get amed partner in hi plan:—but who among us ever reduc himself toth sort of depend in which lydgat now stood, without try tobeliev that he had claim which diminish the humili of ask?it wa true that of late there had seem to be a new languor ofinterest in bulstrod about the hospit; but hi health had got wors,and show sign of a deep-seat nervou affect. in other respectsh did not appear to be chang: he had alwai been highli polit, butlydg had observ in him from the first a mark cold about hismarriag and other privat circumst, a cold which he hadhitherto prefer to ani warmth of familiar between them. hedef the intent from dai to dai, hi habit of act on hisconclus be made infirm by hi repugn to everi possibleconclus and it consequ act. he saw mr. bulstrod often, but hedid not try to us ani occas for hi privat purpos. at on momenth thought, “i will write a letter: i prefer that to ani circuitoustalk;” at anoth he thought, “no; if i were talk to him, i couldmak a retreat befor ani sign of disinclin.”still the dai pass and no letter wa written, no special interviewsought. in hi shrink from the humili of a depend attitudetoward bulstrod, he began to familiar hi imagin with anotherstep even more unlik hi rememb self. he began spontan toconsid whether it would be possibl to carri out that pueril notionof rosamond’s which had often made him angri, name, that thei shouldquit middlemarch without see anyth beyond that prefac. thequest came—“would ani man bui the practic of me even now, for aslittl as it is worth? then the sale might happen as a necessaryprepar for go awai.”but against hi take thi step, which he still felt to be acontempt relinquish of present work, a guilti turn asidefrom what wa a real and might be a widen channel for worthyact, to start again without ani justifi destin, there wasthi obstacl, that the purchas, if procur at all, might not bequickli forthcom. and afterward? rosamond in a poor lodg, thoughin the largest citi or most distant town, would not find the life thatcould save her from gloom, and save him from the reproach of havingplung her into it. for when a man is at the foot of the hill in hisfortun, he mai stai a long while there in spite of professionalaccomplish. in the british climat there is no incompatibilitybetween scientif insight and furnish lodg: the incompatibilityi chiefli between scientif ambit and a wife who object to thatkind of resid.but in the midst of hi hesit, opportun came to decid him. anot from mr. bulstrod request lydgat to call on him at the bank. ahypochondriac tendenc had shown itself in the banker’s constitutionof late; and a lack of sleep, which wa realli onli a slightexagger of an habitu dyspept symptom, had been dwelt on by hima a sign of threaten insan. he want to consult lydgat withoutdelai on that particular morn, although he had noth to tellbeyond what he had told befor. he listen eagerli to what lydgat hadto sai in dissip of hi fear, though thi too wa onlyrepetit; and thi moment in which bulstrod wa receiv a medicalopinion with a sens of comfort, seem to make the commun of aperson need to him easier than it had been in lydgat’s contemplationbeforehand. he had been insist that it would be well for mr.bulstrod to relax hi attent to busi.“on see how ani mental strain, howev slight, mai affect a delicatefram,” said lydgat at that stage of the consult when the remarkstend to pass from the person to the gener, “by the deep stamp whichanxieti will make for a time even on the young and vigor. i amnatur veri strong; yet i have been thoroughli shaken late by anaccumul of troubl.”“i presum that a constitut in the suscept state in which mineat present is, would be especi liabl to fall a victim to cholera,if it visit our district. and sinc it appear near london, wemai well besieg the merci-seat for our protect,” said mr.bulstrod, not intend to evad lydgat’s allus, but reallypreoccupi with alarm about himself.“you have at all event taken your share in us good practicalprecaut for the town, and that is the best mode of ask forprotect,” said lydgat, with a strong distast for the brokenmetaphor and bad logic of the banker’s religion, somewhat increas byth appar deaf of hi sympathi. but hi mind had taken up itslong-prepar movement toward get help, and wa not yet arrest.he ad, “the town ha done well in the wai of cleans, and findingappli; and i think that if the cholera should come, even ourenemi will admit that the arrang in the hospit ar a publicgood.”“truli,” said mr. bulstrod, with some cold. “with regard to whatyou sai, mr. lydgat, about the relax of my mental labor, i havefor some time been entertain a purpos to that effect—a purpos of averi decid charact. i contempl at least a temporari withdrawalfrom the manag of much busi, whether benevol or commerci.also i think of chang my resid for a time: probabl i shallclos or let ‘the shrub,’ and take some place near the coast—underadvic of cours as to salubr. that would be a measur which youwould recommend?”“oh ye,” said lydgat, fall backward in hi chair, withil-repress impati under the banker’s pale earnest ey andintens preoccup with himself.“i have for some time felt that i should open thi subject with you inrel to our hospit,” continu bulstrod. “under thecircumst i have indic, of cours i must ceas to have anyperson share in the manag, and it is contrari to my view ofrespons to continu a larg applic of mean to aninstitut which i cannot watch over and to some extent regul. ishal therefor, in case of my ultim decis to leav middlemarch,consid that i withdraw other support to the new hospit than thatwhich will subsist in the fact that i chiefli suppli the expens ofbuild it, and have contribut further larg sum to it successfulwork.”lydgat’s thought, when bulstrod paus accord to hi wont, wa,“he ha perhap been lose a good deal of monei.” thi wa the mostplaus explan of a speech which had caus rather a startlingchang in hi expect. he said in repli—“the loss to the hospit can hardli be made up, i fear.”“hardli,” return bulstrod, in the same deliber, silveri tone;“except by some chang of plan. the onli person who mai be certainlycount on as will to increas her contribut is mr. casaubon. ihav had an interview with her on the subject, and i have point outto her, as i am about to do to you, that it will be desir to win amor gener support to the new hospit by a chang of system.”anoth paus, but lydgat did not speak.“the chang i mean is an amalgam with the infirmari, so that thenew hospit shall be regard as a special addit to the elderinstitut, have the same direct board. it will be necessari,also, that the medic manag of the two shall be combin. in thiswai ani difficulti as to the adequ mainten of our newestablish will be remov; the benevol interest of the townwil ceas to be divid.”mr. bulstrod had lower hi ey from lydgat’s face to the buttonsof hi coat as he again paus.“no doubt that is a good devic as to wai and mean,” said lydgat,with an edg of ironi in hi tone. “but i can’t be expect to rejoicein it at onc, sinc on of the first result will be that the othermed men will upset or interrupt my method, if it were onli becausethei ar mine.”“i myself, as you know, mr. lydgat, highli valu the opportun ofnew and independ procedur which you have dilig emploi: theorigin plan, i confess, wa on which i had much at heart, undersubmiss to the divin will. but sinc providenti indicationsdemand a renunci from me, i renounc.”bulstrod show a rather exasper abil in thi convers.the broken metaphor and bad logic of motiv which had stir hishear’s contempt were quit consist with a mode of put thefact which made it difficult for lydgat to vent hi own indignationand disappoint. after some rapid reflect, he onli ask—“what did mr. casaubon sai?”“that wa the further statement which i wish to make to you,” saidbulstrod, who had thoroughli prepar hi ministeri explan.“she is, you ar awar, a woman of most munific disposit, andhappili in possess—not i presum of great wealth, but of fund whichsh can well spare. she ha inform me that though she ha destinedth chief part of those fund to anoth purpos, she is will toconsid whether she cannot fulli take my place in relat to thehospit. but she wish for ampl time to matur her thought on thesubject, and i have told her that there is no need for hast—that, infact, my own plan ar not yet absolut.”lydgat wa readi to sai, “if mr. casaubon would take your place,there would be gain, instead of loss.” but there wa still a weight onhi mind which arrest thi cheer candor. he repli, “i suppos,then, that i mai enter into the subject with mr. casaubon.”“precis; that is what she expressli desir. her decis, she sai,will much depend on what you can tell her. but not at present: she is,i believ, just set out on a journei. i have her letter here,” saidmr. bulstrod, draw it out, and read from it. “‘i am immediatelyotherwis engag,’ she sai. ‘i am go into yorkshir with sir jamesand ladi chettam; and the conclus i come to about some land which iam to see there mai affect my power of contribut to the hospit.’thu, mr. lydgat, there is no hast necessari in thi matter; but iwish to appris you beforehand of what mai possibl occur.”mr. bulstrod return the letter to hi side-pocket, and chang hisattitud as if hi busi were close. lydgat, whose renew hopeabout the hospit onli made him more consciou of the fact whichpoison hi hope, felt that hi effort after help, if made at all,must be made now and vigor.“i am much oblig to you for give me full notic,” he said, with afirm intent in hi tone, yet with an interrupted in hi deliverywhich show that he spoke unwillingli. “the highest object to me is myprofess, and i had identifi the hospit with the best us i canat present make of my profess. but the best us is not alwai thesam with monetari success. everyth which ha made the hospitalunpopular ha help with other caus—i think thei ar all connectedwith my profession zeal—to make me unpopular as a practition. i getchiefli patient who can’t pai me. i should like them best, if i hadnobodi to pai on my own side.” lydgat wait a littl, but bulstrodeonli bow, look at him fixedli, and he went on with the sameinterrupt enunci—as if he were bite an object leek.“i have slip into monei difficulti which i can see no wai out of,unless some on who trust me and my futur will advanc me a sumwithout other secur. i had veri littl fortun left when i cameher. i have no prospect of monei from my own famili. my expens, inconsequ of my marriag, have been veri much greater than i hadexpect. the result at thi moment is that it would take a thousandpound to clear me. i mean, to free me from the risk of have all mygood sold in secur of my largest debt—as well as to pai my otherdebt—and leav anyth to keep us a littl beforehand with our smallincom. i find that it is out of the question that my wife’s fathershould make such an advanc. that is why i mention my posit to—toth onli other man who mai be held to have some person connectionwith my prosper or ruin.”lydgat hate to hear himself. but he had spoken now, and had spokenwith unmistak direct. mr. bulstrod repli without hast, butalso without hesit.“i am griev, though, i confess, not surpris by thi inform,mr. lydgat. for my own part, i regret your allianc with mybroth-in-law’s famili, which ha alwai been of prodig habit, andwhich ha alreadi been much indebt to me for sustain in itspres posit. my advic to you, mr. lydgat, would be, that insteadof involv yourself in further oblig, and continu a doubtfulstruggl, you should simpli becom a bankrupt.”“that would not improv my prospect,” said lydgat, rise and speakingbitterli, “even if it were a more agreeabl thing in itself.”“it is alwai a trial,” said mr. bulstrod; “but trial, my dear sir, isour portion here, and is a need correct. i recommend you to weighth advic i have given.”“thank you,” said lydgat, not quit know what he said. “i haveoccupi you too long. good-dai.”chapter lxviii.what suit of grace hath virtu to put onif vice shall wear as good, and do as well?if wrong, if craft, if indiscretionact as fair part with end as laudabl?which all thi mighti volum of eventsth world, the univers map of deed,strongli control, and prove from all descent,that the directest cours still best succe.for should not grave and learn’d experiencethat look with the ey of all the world besid,and with all ag hold intellig,go safer than deceit without a guid!—daniel: _musophilu_.that chang of plan and shift of interest which bulstrod state orbetrai in hi convers with lydgat, had been determin in himbi some sever experi which he had gone through sinc the epoch ofmr. larcher’s sale, when raffl had recogn will ladislaw, and whenth banker had in vain attempt an act of restitut which might movedivin provid to arrest pain consequ.hi certainti that raffl, unless he were dead, would return tomiddlemarch befor long, had been justifi. on christma ev he hadreappear at the shrub. bulstrod wa at home to receiv him, andhind hi commun with the rest of the famili, but he could notaltogeth hinder the circumst of the visit from compromisinghimself and alarm hi wife. raffl prove more unmanag than hehad shown himself to be in hi former appear, hi chronic state ofment restless, the grow effect of habitu intemper,quickli shake off everi impress from what wa said to him. heinsist on stai in the hous, and bulstrod, weigh two set ofevil, felt that thi wa at least not a wors altern than hisgo into the town. he kept him in hi own room for the even andsaw him to bed, raffl all the while amus himself with theannoy he wa caus thi decent and highli prosperousfellow-sinner, an amus which he faceti express as sympathywith hi friend’s pleasur in entertain a man who had beenservic to him, and who had not had all hi earn. there wa acun calcul under thi noisi joke—a cool resolv to extractsometh the handsom from bulstrod as payment for releas from thisnew applic of tortur. but hi cun had a littl overcast itsmark.bulstrod wa inde more tortur than the coars fibr of rafflescould enabl him to imagin. he had told hi wife that he wa simplytak care of thi wretch creatur, the victim of vice, who mightotherwis injur himself; he impli, without the direct form offalsehood, that there wa a famili tie which bound him to thi care,and that there were sign of mental alien in raffl which urgedcaut. he would himself drive the unfortun be awai the nextmorn. in these hint he felt that he wa suppli mr. bulstrodewith precautionari inform for hi daughter and servant, andaccount for hi allow no on but himself to enter the room evenwith food and drink. but he sat in an agoni of fear lest raffl shouldb overheard in hi loud and plain refer to past fact—lest mr.bulstrod should be even tempt to listen at the door. how could hehind her, how betrai hi terror by open the door to detect her?she wa a woman of honest direct habit, and littl like to take solow a cours in order to arriv at pain knowledg; but fear wasstrong than the calcul of probabl.in thi wai raffl had push the tortur too far, and produc aneffect which had not been in hi plan. by show himself hopelesslyunmanag he had made bulstrod feel that a strong defianc wa theonli resourc left. after take raffl to bed that night the bankerord hi close carriag to be readi at half-past seven the nextmorn. at six o’clock he had alreadi been long dress, and had spentsom of hi wretched in prayer, plead hi motiv for avertingth worst evil if in anyth he had us falsiti and spoken what wasnot true befor god. for bulstrod shrank from a direct lie with anintens disproportion to the number of hi more indirect misde.but mani of these misde were like the subtl muscular movementswhich ar not taken account of in the conscious, though thei bringabout the end that we fix our mind on and desir. and it is onli whatw ar vividli consciou of that we can vividli imagin to be seen byomnisci.bulstrod carri hi candl to the bedsid of raffl, who wasappar in a pain dream. he stood silent, hope that thepres of the light would serv to waken the sleeper gradual andgent, for he fear some nois as the consequ of a too suddenawaken. he had watch for a coupl of minut or more theshudd and pant which seem like to end in wake, whenraffl, with a long half-stifl moan, start up and stare round himin terror, trembl and gasp. but he made no further nois, andbulstrod, set down the candl, await hi recoveri.it wa a quarter of an hour later befor bulstrod, with a coldperemptori of manner which he had not befor shown, said, “i cameto call you thu earli, mr. raffl, becaus i have order thecarriag to be readi at half-past seven, and intend myself to conducty as far as ils, where you can either take the railwai or await acoach.” raffl wa about to speak, but bulstrod anticip himimperi with the word, “be silent, sir, and hear what i have tosai. i shall suppli you with monei now, and i will furnish you with areason sum from time to time, on your applic to me by letter;but if you choos to present yourself here again, if you return tomiddlemarch, if you us your tongu in a manner injuri to me, youwil have to live on such fruit as your malic can bring you, withouthelp from me. nobodi will pai you well for blast my name: i know theworst you can do against me, and i shall brave it if you dare to thrustyourself upon me again. get up, sir, and do as i order you, withoutnois, or i will send for a policeman to take you off my premis, andyou mai carri your stori into everi pothous in the town, but youshal have no sixpenc from me to pai your expens there.”bulstrod had rare in hi life spoken with such nervou energi: hehad been deliber on thi speech and it probabl effect through alarg part of the night; and though he did not trust to it ultimatelysav him from ani return of raffl, he had conclud that it wa thebest throw he could make. it succeed in enforc submiss from thejad man thi morn: hi empoison system at thi moment quailedbefor bulstrod’s cold, resolut bear, and he wa taken off quietlyin the carriag befor the famili breakfast time. the servant imaginedhim to be a poor relat, and were not surpris that a strict manlik their master, who held hi head high in the world, should beasham of such a cousin and want to get rid of him. the banker’s driveof ten mile with hi hate companion wa a dreari begin of thechristma dai; but at the end of the drive, raffl had recov hisspirit, and part in a content for which there wa the goodreason that the banker had given him a hundr pound. variou motivesurg bulstrod to thi open-handed, but he did not himself inquireclos into all of them. as he had stood watch raffl in hisuneasi sleep, it had certainli enter hi mind that the man had beenmuch shatter sinc the first gift of two hundr pound.he had taken care to repeat the incis statement of hi resolv notto be plai on ani more; and had tri to penetr raffl with thefact that he had shown the risk of bribe him to be quit equal toth risk of defi him. but when, freed from hi repuls presenc,bulstrod return to hi quiet home, he brought with him no confidencethat he had secur more than a respit. it wa as if he had had aloathsom dream, and could not shake off it imag with their hatefulkindr of sensat—as if on all the pleasant surround of hislif a danger reptil had left hi slimi trace.who can know how much of hi most inward life is made up of thethought he believ other men to have about him, until that fabric ofopinion is threaten with ruin?bulstrod wa onli the more consciou that there wa a deposit ofuneasi presenti in hi wife’s mind, becaus she carefulli avoidedani allus to it. he had been us everi dai to tast the flavor ofsupremaci and the tribut of complet defer: and the certainti thath wa watch or measur with a hidden suspicion of hi have somediscredit secret, made hi voic totter when he wa speak toedif. forese, to men of bulstrod’s anxiou tempera, isoften wors than see; and hi imagin continu heighten theanguish of an immin disgrac. ye, immin; for if hi defianc ofraffl did not keep the man awai—and though he prai for thi resulth hardli hope for it—the disgrac wa certain. in vain he said tohimself that, if permit, it would be a divin visit, achastis, a prepar; he recoil from the imagin burn; andh judg that it must be more for the divin glori that he shouldescap dishonor. that recoil had at last urg him to make preparationsfor quit middlemarch. if evil truth must be report of him, hewould then be at a less scorch distanc from the contempt of hi oldneighbor; and in a new scene, where hi life would not have gatheredth same wide sensibl, the tormentor, if he pursu him, would beless formid. to leav the place final would, he knew, beextrem pain to hi wife, and on other ground he would havepref to stai where he had struck root. henc he made hisprepar at first in a condit wai, wish to leav on allsid an open for hi return after brief absenc, if ani favorableintervent of provid should dissip hi fear. he wa preparingto transfer hi manag of the bank, and to give up ani activecontrol of other commerci affair in the neighborhood, on the groundof hi fail health, but without exclud hi futur resumpt ofsuch work. the measur would caus him some ad expens and somediminut of incom beyond what he had alreadi undergon from thegener depress of trade; and the hospit present itself as aprincip object of outlai on which he could fairli econom.thi wa the experi which had determin hi convers withlydg. but at thi time hi arrang had most of them gone nofarth than a stage at which he could recal them if thei prove to beunnecessari. he continu defer the final step; in the midst ofhi fear, like mani a man who is in danger of shipwreck or of beingdash from hi carriag by runawai hors, he had a clingingimpress that someth would happen to hinder the worst, and that tospoil hi life by a late transplant might be over-hasti—especiallysinc it wa difficult to account satisfactorili to hi wife for theproject of their indefinit exil from the onli place where she wouldlik to live.among the affair bulstrod had to care for, wa the manag of thefarm at stone court in case of hi absenc; and on thi as well as onal other matter connect with ani hous and land he possess in orabout middlemarch, he had consult caleb garth. like everi on elsewho had busi of that sort, he want to get the agent who wa moreanxi for hi employ’s interest than hi own. with regard to stonecourt, sinc bulstrod wish to retain hi hold on the stock, and tohav an arrang by which he himself could, if he chose, resum hisfavorit recreat of superintend, caleb had advis him not totrust to a mere bailiff, but to let the land, stock, and implementsyearli, and take a proportion share of the proce.“mai i trust to you to find me a tenant on these term, mr. garth?”said bulstrod. “and will you mention to me the yearli sum which wouldrepai you for manag these affair which we have discuss togeth?”“i’ll think about it,” said caleb, in hi blunt wai. “i’ll see how ican make it out.”if it had not been that he had to consid fred vinci’s futur, mr.garth would not probabl have been glad of ani addit to hi work, ofwhich hi wife wa alwai fear an excess for him as he grew older.but on quit bulstrod after that convers, a veri allur ideaoccur to him about thi said let of stone court. what ifbulstrod would agre to hi place fred vinci there on theunderstand that he, caleb garth, should be respons for themanag? it would be an excel school for fred; he might makea modest incom there, and still have time left to get knowledg byhelp in other busi. he mention hi notion to mr. garth withsuch evid delight that she could not bear to chill hi pleasur byexpress her constant fear of hi undertak too much.“the lad would be as happi as two,” he said, throw himself back inhi chair, and look radiant, “if i could tell him it wa allsettl. think; susan! hi mind had been run on that place foryear befor old featherston di. and it would be as pretti a turn ofth as could be that he should hold the place in a good industriouswai after all—by hi take to busi. for it’s like enoughbulstrod might let him go on, and gradual bui the stock. he hasn’tmade up hi mind, i can see, whether or not he shall settl somewhereels as a last thing. i never wa better pleas with a notion in mylif. and then the children might be marri by-and-by, susan.”“you will not give ani hint of the plan to fred, until you ar surethat bulstrod would agre to the plan?” said mr. garth, in a tone ofgentl caution. “and as to marriag, caleb, we old peopl need not helpto hasten it.”“oh, i don’t know,” said caleb, swing hi head asid. “marriag is atam thing. fred would want less of my bit and bridl. howev, ishal sai noth till i know the ground i’m tread on. i shall speakto bulstrod again.”he took hi earliest opportun of do so. bulstrod had anythingbut a warm interest in hi nephew fred vinci, but he had a strong wishto secur mr. garth’s servic on mani scatter point of busi atwhich he wa sure to be a consider loser, if thei were under lessconscienti manag. on that ground he made no object to mr.garth’s propos; and there wa also anoth reason why he wa notsorri to give a consent which wa to benefit on of the vinci famili.it wa that mr. bulstrod, have heard of lydgat’s debt, had beenanxi to know whether her husband could not do someth for poorrosamond, and had been much troubl on learn from him thatlydg’s affair were not easili remedi, and that the wisest planwa to let them “take their cours.” mr. bulstrod had then said forth first time, “i think you ar alwai a littl hard toward myfamili, nichola. and i am sure i have no reason to deni ani of myrel. too worldli thei mai be, but no on ever had to sai thatthei were not respect.”“my dear harriet,” said mr. bulstrod, winc under hi wife’s ey,which were fill with tear, “i have suppli your brother with agreat deal of capit. i cannot be expect to take care of hi marriedchildren.”that seem to be true, and mr. bulstrod’s remonstr subsid intop for poor rosamond, whose extravag educ she had alwaysforeseen the fruit of.but rememb that dialogu, mr. bulstrod felt that when he had totalk to hi wife fulli about hi plan of quit middlemarch, heshould be glad to tell her that he had made an arrang which mightb for the good of her nephew fred. at present he had mere mentionedto her that he thought of shut up the shrub for a few month, andtak a hous on the southern coast.henc mr. garth got the assur he desir, name, that in case ofbulstrod’s departur from middlemarch for an indefinit time, fredvinci should be allow to have the tenanc of stone court on the termspropos.caleb wa so elat with hi hope of thi “neat turn” be given toth, that if hi self-control had not been brace by a littleaffection wife scold, he would have betrai everyth tomari, want “to give the child comfort.” howev, he restrainedhimself, and kept in strict privaci from fred certain visit which hewa make to stone court, in order to look more thoroughli into thestat of the land and stock, and take a preliminari estim. he wascertainli more eager in these visit than the probabl speed of eventsrequir him to be; but he wa stimul by a fatherli delight inoccupi hi mind with thi bit of probabl happi which he held instor like a hidden birthdai gift for fred and mari.“but suppos the whole scheme should turn out to be a castl in theair?” said mr. garth.“well, well,” repli caleb; “the castl will tumbl about nobodi’shead.”chapter lxix.“if thou hast heard a word, let it die with thee.”—_ecclesiasticu_.mr. bulstrod wa still seat in hi manag’s room at the bank, aboutthre o’clock of the same dai on which he had receiv lydgat there,when the clerk enter to sai that hi hors wa wait, and also thatmr. garth wa outsid and beg to speak with him.“by all mean,” said bulstrod; and caleb enter. “prai sit down, mr.garth,” continu the banker, in hi suavest tone.“i am glad that you arriv just in time to find me here. i know youcount your minut.”“oh,” said caleb, gentli, with a slow swing of hi head on on side, ash seat himself and laid hi hat on the floor.he look at the ground, lean forward and let hi long fingersdroop between hi leg, while each finger move in success, as if itwer share some thought which fill hi larg quiet brow.mr. bulstrod, like everi on els who knew caleb, wa us to hisslow in begin to speak on ani topic which he felt to beimport, and rather expect that he wa about to recur to the buyingof some hous in blindman’s court, for the sake of pull them down,as a sacrific of properti which would be well repaid by the influx ofair and light on that spot. it wa by proposit of thi kind thatcaleb wa sometim troublesom to hi employ; but he had usuallyfound bulstrod readi to meet him in project of improv, and theyhad got on well togeth. when he spoke again, howev, it wa to sai,in rather a subdu voic—“i have just come awai from stone court, mr. bulstrod.”“you found noth wrong there, i hope,” said the banker; “i wa theremyself yesterdai. abel ha done well with the lamb thi year.”“why, ye,” said caleb, look up grave, “there is someth wrong—astrang, who is veri ill, i think. he want a doctor, and i came totel you of that. hi name is raffl.”he saw the shock of hi word pass through bulstrod’s frame. onthi subject the banker had thought that hi fear were too constantlyon the watch to be taken by surpris; but he had been mistaken.“poor wretch!” he said in a compassion tone, though hi lipstrembl a littl. “do you know how he came there?”“i took him myself,” said caleb, quietli—“took him up in my gig. he hadgot down from the coach, and wa walk a littl beyond the turningfrom the toll-hous, and i overtook him. he rememb see me withyou onc befor, at stone court, and he ask me to take him on. i sawh wa ill: it seem to me the right thing to do, to carri him undershelt. and now i think you should lose no time in get advic forhim.” caleb took up hi hat from the floor as he end, and rose slowlyfrom hi seat.“certainli,” said bulstrod, whose mind wa veri activ at thi moment.“perhap you will yourself oblig me, mr. garth, by call at mr.lydgat’s as you pass—or stai! he mai at thi hour probabl be at thehospit. i will first send my man on the hors there with a note thisinst, and then i will myself ride to stone court.”bulstrod quickli wrote a note, and went out himself to give thecommiss to hi man. when he return, caleb wa stand as beforewith on hand on the back of the chair, hold hi hat with the other.in bulstrod’s mind the domin thought wa, “perhap raffl onlyspok to garth of hi ill. garth mai wonder, as he must have donebefor, at thi disreput fellow’s claim intimaci with me; but hewil know noth. and he is friendli to me—i can be of us to him.”he long for some confirm of thi hope conjectur, but to haveask ani question as to what raffl had said or done would have beento betrai fear.“i am exceedingli oblig to you, mr. garth,” he said, in hi usualton of polit. “my servant will be back in a few minut, and ishal then go myself to see what can be done for thi unfortun man.perhap you had some other busi with me? if so, prai be seat.”“thank you,” said caleb, make a slight gestur with hi right hand towaiv the invit. “i wish to sai, mr. bulstrod, that i mustrequest you to put your busi into some other hand than mine. i amoblig to you for your handsom wai of meet me—about the let ofston court, and all other busi. but i must give it up.” a sharpcertainti enter like a stab into bulstrod’s soul.“thi is sudden, mr. garth,” wa all he could sai at first.“it is,” said caleb; “but it is quit fix. i must give it up.”he spoke with a firm which wa veri gentl, and yet he could seethat bulstrod seem to cower under that gentl, hi face lookingdri and hi ey swerv awai from the glanc which rest on him.caleb felt a deep piti for him, but he could have us no pretext toaccount for hi resolv, even if thei would have been of ani us.“you have been led to thi, i apprehend, by some slander concern meutter by that unhappi creatur,” said bulstrod, anxiou now to knowth utmost.“that is true. i can’t deni that i act upon what i heard from him.”“you ar a conscienti man, mr. garth—a man, i trust, who feelshimself account to god. you would not wish to injur me by beingtoo readi to believ a slander,” said bulstrod, cast about forplea that might be adapt to hi hearer’s mind. “that is a poorreason for give up a connect which i think i mai sai will bemutu benefici.”“i would injur no man if i could help it,” said caleb; “even if ithought god wink at it. i hope i should have a feel for myfellow-creatur. but, sir—i am oblig to believ that thi raffl hastold me the truth. and i can’t be happi in work with you, orprofit by you. it hurt my mind. i must beg you to seek anotherag.”“veri well, mr. garth. but i must at least claim to know the worst thath ha told you. i must know what is the foul speech that i am liableto be the victim of,” said bulstrod, a certain amount of angerbegin to mingl with hi humili befor thi quiet man whorenounc hi benefit.“that’s needless,” said caleb, wave hi hand, bow hi headslightli, and not swerv from the tone which had in it the mercifulintent to spare thi pitiabl man. “what he ha said to me willnev pass from my lip, unless someth now unknown forc it fromm. if you led a harm life for gain, and kept other out of theirright by deceit, to get the more for yourself, i dare sai yourep—you would like to go back, and can’t: that must be a bitterth”—caleb paus a moment and shook hi head—“it is not for me tomak your life harder to you.”“but you do—you do make it harder to me,” said bulstrod constrainedinto a genuin, plead cry. “you make it harder to me by turn yourback on me.”“that i’m forc to do,” said caleb, still more gentli, lift up hishand. “i am sorri. i don’t judg you and sai, he is wick, and i amright. god forbid. i don’t know everyth. a man mai do wrong, andhi will mai rise clear out of it, though he can’t get hi life clear.that’s a bad punish. if it is so with you,—well, i’m veri sorri foryou. but i have that feel insid me, that i can’t go on work withyou. that’s all, mr. bulstrod. everyth els is buri, so far as mywil goe. and i wish you good-dai.”“on moment, mr. garth!” said bulstrod, hurriedli. “i mai trust thento your solemn assur that you will not repeat either to man orwoman what—even if it have ani degre of truth in it—is yet a maliciousrepresent?” caleb’s wrath wa stir, and he said, indignantli—“why should i have said it if i didn’t mean it? i am in no fear of you.such tale as that will never tempt my tongu.”“excus me—i am agit—i am the victim of thi abandon man.”“stop a bit! you have got to consid whether you didn’t help to makehim wors, when you profit by hi vice.”“you ar wrong me by too readili believ him,” said bulstrod,oppress, as by a nightmar, with the inabl to deni flatli whatraffl might have said; and yet feel it an escap that caleb hadnot so state it to him as to ask for that flat denial.“no,” said caleb, lift hi hand deprecatingli; “i am readi tobeliev better, when better is prove. i rob you of no good chanc. asto speak, i hold it a crime to expos a man’s sin unless i’m clearit must be done to save the innoc. that is my wai of think, mr.bulstrod, and what i sai, i’ve no need to swear. i wish you good-dai.”some hour later, when he wa at home, caleb said to hi wife,incident, that he had had some littl differ with bulstrod,and that in consequ, he had given up all notion of take stonecourt, and inde had resign do further busi for him.“he wa dispos to interfer too much, wa he?” said mr. garth,imagin that her husband had been touch on hi sensit point, andnot been allow to do what he thought right as to materi and modesof work.“oh,” said caleb, bow hi head and wave hi hand grave. and mr.garth knew that thi wa a sign of hi not intend to speak furtheron the subject.as for bulstrod, he had almost immedi mount hi hors and setoff for stone court, be anxiou to arriv there befor lydgat.hi mind wa crowd with imag and conjectur, which were a languageto hi hope and fear, just as we hear tone from the vibrat whichshak our whole system. the deep humili with which he had wincedund caleb garth’s knowledg of hi past and reject of hispatronag, altern with and almost gave wai to the sens of safetyin the fact that garth, and no other, had been the man to whom raffleshad spoken. it seem to him a sort of earnest that provid intendedhi rescu from wors consequ; the wai be thu left open forth hope of secreci. that raffl should be afflict with ill,that he should have been led to stone court rather thanelsewher—bulstrod’s heart flutter at the vision of probabilitieswhich these event conjur up. if it should turn out that he wa freedfrom all danger of disgrac—if he could breath in perfect liberti—hislif should be more consecr than it had ever been befor. hement lift up thi vow as if it would urg the result he longedfor—he tri to believ in the potenc of that prayer resolut—itspot to determin death. he knew that he ought to sai, “thy will bedon;” and he said it often. but the intens desir remain that thewil of god might be the death of that hate man.yet when he arriv at stone court he could not see the chang inraffl without a shock. but for hi pallor and feebl, bulstrodewould have call the chang in him entir mental. instead of hisloud torment mood, he show an intens, vagu terror, and seem todeprec bulstrod’s anger, becaus the monei wa all gone—he had beenrob—it had half of it been taken from him. he had onli come herebecaus he wa ill and somebodi wa hunt him—somebodi wa after him,he had told nobodi anyth, he had kept hi mouth shut. bulstrod, notknow the signific of these symptom, interpret thi newnerv suscept into a mean of alarm raffl into trueconfess, and tax him with falsehood in sai that he had nottold anyth, sinc he had just told the man who took him up in hisgig and brought him to stone court. raffl deni thi with solemnadjur; the fact be that the link of conscious wereinterrupt in him, and that hi minut terror-stricken narr tocaleb garth had been deliv under a set of visionari impuls whichhad drop back into dark.bulstrod’s heart sank again at thi sign that he could get no graspov the wretch man’s mind, and that no word of raffl could betrust as to the fact which he most want to know, name, whether ornot he had realli kept silenc to everi on in the neighborhood exceptcaleb garth. the housekeep had told him without the least constraintof manner that sinc mr. garth left, raffl had ask her for beer,and after that had not spoken, seem veri ill. on that side it mightb conclud that there had been no betray. mr. abel thought, liketh servant at the shrub, that the strang man belong to theunpleas “kin” who ar among the troubl of the rich; she had atfirst refer the kinship to mr. rigg, and where there wa propertyleft, the buzz presenc of such larg blue-bottl seem naturalenough. how he could be “kin” to bulstrod as well wa not so clear,but mr. abel agre with her husband that there wa “no know,” aproposit which had a great deal of mental food for her, so that sheshook her head over it without further specul.in less than an hour lydgat arriv. bulstrod met him outsid thewainscot parlor, where raffl wa, and said—“i have call you in, mr. lydgat, to an unfortun man who wa oncein my employ, mani year ago. afterward he went to america, andreturn i fear to an idl dissolut life. be destitut, he ha aclaim on me. he wa slightli connect with rigg, the former owner ofthi place, and in consequ found hi wai here. i believ he isseri ill: appar hi mind is affect. i feel bound to do theutmost for him.”lydgat, who had the remembr of hi last convers withbulstrod strongli upon him, wa not dispos to sai an unnecessaryword to him, and bow slightli in answer to thi account; but justbefor enter the room he turn automat and said, “what is hisnam?”—to know name be as much a part of the medic man’saccomplish as of the practic politician’s.“raffl, john raffl,” said bulstrod, who hope that whatev becameof raffl, lydgat would never know ani more of him.when he had thoroughli examin and consid the patient, lydgateord that he should go to bed, and be kept there in as completequiet as possibl, and then went with bulstrod into anoth room.“it is a seriou case, i apprehend,” said the banker, befor lydgatebegan to speak.“no—and ye,” said lydgat, half dubious. “it is difficult to decidea to the possibl effect of long-stand complic; but the manhad a robust constitut to begin with. i should not expect thisattack to be fatal, though of cours the system is in a ticklish state.he should be well watch and attend to.”“i will remain here myself,” said bulstrod. “mr. abel and her husbandar inexperienc. i can easili remain here for the night, if you willoblig me by take a note for mr. bulstrod.”“i should think that is hardli necessari,” said lydgat. “he seem tameand terrifi enough. he might becom more unmanag. but there is aman here—is there not?”“i have more than onc stai here a few night for the sake ofseclus,” said bulstrod, indiffer; “i am quit dispos to doso now. mr. abel and her husband can reliev or aid me, if necessari.”“veri well. then i need give my direct onli to you,” said lydgat,not feel surpris at a littl peculiar in bulstrod.“you think, then, that the case is hope?” said bulstrod, whenlydg had end give hi order.“unless there turn out to be further complic, such as i have notat present detect—ye,” said lydgat. “he mai pass on to a worsestag; but i should not wonder if he got better in a few dai, byadher to the treatment i have prescrib. there must be firm.rememb, if he call for liquor of ani sort, not to give them to him.in my opinion, men in hi condit ar often kill by treatmentthan by the diseas. still, new symptom mai aris. i shall come againto-morrow morn.”after wait for the note to be carri to mr. bulstrod, lydgaterod awai, form no conjectur, in the first instanc, about thehistori of raffl, but rehears the whole argument, which had latelybeen much stir by the public of dr. ware’s abund experiencein america, as to the right wai of treat case of alcoholicpoison such as thi. lydgat, when abroad, had alreadi beeninterest in thi question: he wa strongli convinc against thepreval practic of allow alcohol and persist administeringlarg dose of opium; and he had repeatedli act on thi convictionwith a favor result.“the man is in a diseas state,” he thought, “but there’s a good dealof wear in him still. i suppos he is an object of chariti tobulstrod. it is curiou what patch of hard and tender liesid by side in men’s disposit. bulstrod seem the mostunsympathet fellow i ever saw about some peopl, and yet he ha takenno end of troubl, and spent a great deal of monei, on benevolentobject. i suppos he ha some test by which he find out whom heavencar for—he ha made up hi mind that it doesn’t care for me.”thi streak of bitter came from a plenteou sourc, and keptwiden in the current of hi thought as he near lowick gate. he hadnot been there sinc hi first interview with bulstrod in the morn,have been found at the hospit by the banker’s messeng; and forth first time he wa return to hi home without the vision of anyexpedi in the background which left him a hope of rais moneyenough to deliv him from the come destitut of everyth whichmad hi marri life toler—everyth which save him and rosamondfrom that bare isol in which thei would be forc to recogn howlittl of a comfort thei could be to each other. it wa more bearableto do without tender for himself than to see that hi owntend could make no amend for the lack of other thing to her.the suffer of hi own pride from humili past and to come werekeen enough, yet thei were hardli distinguish to himself from thatmor acut pain which domin them—the pain of forese thatrosamond would come to regard him chiefli as the caus ofdisappoint and unhappi to her. he had never like themakeshift of poverti, and thei had never befor enter into hisprospect for himself; but he wa begin now to imagin how twocreatur who love each other, and had a stock of thought in common,might laugh over their shabbi furnitur, and their calcul how farthei could afford butter and egg. but the glimps of that poetryseem as far off from him as the careless of the golden ag; inpoor rosamond’s mind there wa not room enough for luxuri to looksmal in. he got down from hi hors in a veri sad mood, and went intoth hous, not expect to be cheer except by hi dinner, andreflect that befor the even close it would be wise to tellrosamond of hi applic to bulstrod and it failur. it would bewel not to lose time in prepar her for the worst.but hi dinner wait long for him befor he wa abl to eat it. for onent he found that dover’s agent had alreadi put a man in thehous, and when he ask where mr. lydgat wa, he wa told that shewa in her bedroom. he went up and found her stretch on the bed paleand silent, without an answer even in her face to ani word or look ofhi. he sat down by the bed and lean over her said with almost a cryof prayer—“forgiv me for thi miseri, my poor rosamond! let us onli love oneanoth.”she look at him silent, still with the blank despair on her face;but then the tear began to fill her blue ey, and her lip trembl.the strong man had had too much to bear that dai. he let hi head fallbesid her and sob.he did not hinder her from go to her father earli in the morn—itseem now that he ought not to hinder her from do as she pleas.in half an hour she came back, and said that papa and mamma wish herto go and stai with them while thing were in thi miser state.papa said he could do noth about the debt—if he paid thi, therewould be half-a-dozen more. she had better come back home again tilllydg had got a comfort home for her. “do you object, tertiu?”“do as you like,” said lydgat. “but thing ar not come to a crisisimmedi. there is no hurri.”“i should not go till to-morrow,” said rosamond; “i shall want to packmi cloth.”“oh, i would wait a littl longer than to-morrow—there is no knowingwhat mai happen,” said lydgat, with bitter ironi. “i mai get my neckbroken, and that mai make thing easier to you.”it wa lydgat’s misfortun and rosamond’s too, that hi tendernesstoward her, which wa both an emot prompt and awel-consid resolv, wa inevit interrupt by these outburstsof indign either iron or remonstr. she thought them totallyunwarr, and the repuls which thi except sever excitedin her wa in danger of make the more persist tendernessunaccept.“i see you do not wish me to go,” she said, with chill mild; “whycan you not sai so, without that kind of violenc? i shall stai untily request me to do otherwis.”lydgat said no more, but went out on hi round. he felt bruis andshatt, and there wa a dark line under hi ey which rosamond hadnot seen befor. she could not bear to look at him. tertiu had a wayof take thing which made them a great deal wors for her.chapter lxx.“our deed still travel with us from afar,and what we have been make us what we ar.”bulstrod’s first object after lydgat had left stone court wa toexamin raffl’s pocket, which he imagin were sure to carri signsin the shape of hotel-bill of the place he had stop in, if he hadnot told the truth in sai that he had come straight from liverpoolbecaus he wa ill and had no monei. there were variou bill crammedinto hi pocketbook, but none of a later date than christma at anyoth place, except on, which bore date that morn. thi wascrumpl up with a hand-bill about a hors-fair in on of histail-pocket, and repres the cost of three dai’ stai at an inn atbilklei, where the fair wa held—a town at least forti mile frommiddlemarch. the bill wa heavi, and sinc raffl had no luggag withhim, it seem probabl that he had left hi portmanteau behind inpay, in order to save monei for hi travel fare; for hi pursewa empti, and he had onli a coupl of sixpenc and some loos pencein hi pocket.bulstrod gather a sens of safeti from these indic thatraffl had realli kept at a distanc from middlemarch sinc hismemor visit at christma. at a distanc and among peopl who werestrang to bulstrod, what satisfact could there be to raffl’storment, self-magnifi vein in tell old scandal storiesabout a middlemarch banker? and what harm if he did talk? the chiefpoint now wa to keep watch over him as long as there wa ani danger ofthat intellig rave, that unaccount impuls to tell, whichseem to have act toward caleb garth; and bulstrod felt muchanxieti lest some such impuls should come over him at the sight oflydg. he sat up alon with him through the night, onli order thehousekeep to lie down in her cloth, so as to be readi when hecal her, alleg hi own indisposit to sleep, and hi anxieti tocarri out the doctor’s order. he did carri them out faithfulli,although raffl wa incessantli ask for brandi, and declar thath wa sink awai—that the earth wa sink awai from under him. hewa restless and sleepless, but still quail and manag. on theoffer of the food order by lydgat, which he refus, and the denialof other thing which he demand, he seem to concentr all histerror on bulstrod, imploringli deprec hi anger, hi reveng onhim by starvat, and declar with strong oath that he had nevertold ani mortal a word against him. even thi bulstrod felt that hewould not have like lydgat to hear; but a more alarm sign offit altern in hi delirium wa, that in-the morn twilightraffl suddenli seem to imagin a doctor present, address him anddeclar that bulstrod want to starv him to death out of revengefor tell, when he never had told.bulstrod’s nativ imperi and strength of determin servedhim well. thi delic-look man, himself nervous perturb, foundth need stimulu in hi strenuou circumst, and through thatdifficult night and morn, while he had the air of an anim corpsereturn to movement without warmth, hold the masteri by it chillimpass, hi mind wa intens at work think of what he hadto guard against and what would win him secur. whatev prayer hemight lift up, whatev statement he might inwardli make of thi man’swretch spiritu condit, and the duti he himself wa under tosubmit to the punish divin appoint for him rather than to wishfor evil to anoth—through all thi effort to condens word into asolid mental state, there pierc and spread with irresistiblevivid the imag of the event he desir. and in the train ofthos imag came their apolog. he could not but see the death ofraffl, and see in it hi own deliver. what wa the remov ofthi wretch creatur? he wa impenit—but were not public criminalsimpenit?—yet the law decid on their fate. should provid inthi case award death, there wa no sin in contempl death as thedesir issu—if he kept hi hand from hasten it—if hescrupul did what wa prescrib. even here there might be amistak: human prescript were fallibl thing: lydgat had saidthat treatment had hasten death,—why not hi own method of treatment?but of cours intent wa everyth in the question of right andwrong.and bulstrod set himself to keep hi intent separ from hisdesir. he inwardli declar that he intend to obei order. whyshould he have got into ani argument about the valid of theseord? it wa onli the common trick of desir—which avail itself ofani irrelev sceptic, find larger room for itself in alluncertainti about effect, in everi obscur that look like theabsenc of law. still, he did obei the order.hi anxieti continu glanc toward lydgat, and hi remembranceof what had taken place between them the morn befor wa accompaniedwith sensibl which had not been rous at all dure the actualscen. he had then care but littl about lydgat’s pain impressionswith regard to the suggest chang in the hospit, or about thedisposit toward himself which what he held to be hi justifiablerefus of a rather exorbit request might call forth. he recur toth scene now with a percept that he had probabl made lydgat hisenemi, and with an awaken desir to propiti him, or rather tocreat in him a strong sens of person oblig. he regret thath had not at onc made even an unreason monei-sacrific. for incas of unpleas suspicion, or even knowledg gather from therav of raffl, bulstrod would have felt that he had a defenc inlydg’s mind by have confer a moment benefit on him. but theregret had perhap come too late.strang, piteou conflict in the soul of thi unhappi man, who hadlong for year to be better than he wa—who had taken hi selfishpass into disciplin and clad them in sever robe, so that he hadwalk with them as a devout choir, till now that a terror had risenamong them, and thei could chant no longer, but threw out their commoncri for safeti.it wa nearli the middl of the dai befor lydgat arriv: he hadmeant to come earlier, but had been detain, he said; and hisshatt look were notic by balstrod. but he immedi threwhimself into the consider of the patient, and inquir strictlyinto all that had occur. raffl wa wors, would take hardli anyfood, wa persist wake and restlessli rave; but still notviol. contrari to bulstrod’s alarm expect, he took littlenotic of lydgat’s presenc, and continu to talk or murmurincoher.“what do you think of him?” said bulstrod, in privat.“the symptom ar wors.”“you ar less hope?”“no; i still think he mai come round. ar you go to stai hereyourself?” said lydgat, look at bulstrod with an abrupt question,which made him uneasi, though in realiti it wa not due to anysuspici conjectur.“ye, i think so,” said bulstrod, govern himself and speak withdeliber. “mr. bulstrod is advis of the reason which detainm. mr. abel and her husband ar not experienc enough to be leftquit alon, and thi kind of respons is scarc includ intheir servic of me. you have some fresh instruct, i presum.”the chief new instruct that lydgat had to give wa on theadministr of extrem moder dose of opium, in case of thesleepless continu after sever hour. he had taken theprecaut of bring opium in hi pocket, and he gave minutedirect to bulstrod as to the dose, and the point at which theyshould ceas. he insist on the risk of not ceas; and repeat hisord that no alcohol should be given.“from what i see of the case,” he end, “narcot is the onli thing ishould be much afraid of. he mai wear through even without much food.there’s a good deal of strength in him.”“you look ill yourself, mr. lydgat—a most unusu, i mai sayunpreced thing in my knowledg of you,” said bulstrod, show asolicitud as unlik hi indiffer the dai befor, as hi presentreckless about hi own fatigu wa unlik hi habitualself-cherish anxieti. “i fear you ar harass.”“ye, i am,” said lydgat, brusqu, hold hi hat, and readi to go.“someth new, i fear,” said bulstrod, inquiringli. “prai be seat.”“no, thank you,” said lydgat, with some hauteur. “i mention to youyesterdai what wa the state of my affair. there is noth to add,except that the execut ha sinc then been actual put into myhous. on can tell a good deal of troubl in a short sentenc. i willsai good morn.”“stai, mr. lydgat, stai,” said bulstrod; “i have been reconsideringthi subject. i wa yesterdai taken by surpris, and saw itsuperfici. mr. bulstrod is anxiou for her niec, and i myselfshould griev at a calamit chang in your posit. claim on me arenumer, but on reconsider, i esteem it right that i should incura small sacrific rather than leav you unaid. you said, i think,that a thousand pound would suffic entir to free you from yourburthen, and enabl you to recov a firm stand?”“ye,” said lydgat, a great leap of joi within him surmount everyoth feel; “that would pai all my debt, and leav me a littl onhand. i could set about econom in our wai of live. and by-and-bymi practic might look up.”“if you will wait a moment, mr. lydgat, i will draw a check to thatamount. i am awar that help, to be effectu in these case, should bethorough.”while bulstrod wrote, lydgat turn to the window think of hishom—think of hi life with it good start save from frustrat,it good purpos still unbroken.“you can give me a note of hand for thi, mr. lydgat,” said thebank, advanc toward him with the check. “and by-and-by, i hope,you mai be in circumst gradual to repai me. meanwhil, i havepleasur in think that you will be releas from furtherdifficulti.”“i am deepli oblig to you,” said lydgat. “you have restor to meth prospect of work with some happi and some chanc of good.”it appear to him a veri natur movement in bulstrod that he shouldhav reconsid hi refus: it correspond with the more munificentsid of hi charact. but as he put hi hack into a canter, that hemight get the sooner home, and tell the good new to rosamond, and getcash at the bank to pai over to dover’s agent, there cross hi mind,with an unpleas impress, as from a dark-wing flight of evilauguri across hi vision, the thought of that contrast in himself whicha few month had brought—that he should be overjoi at be under astrong person oblig—that he should be overjoi at get moneyfor himself from bulstrod.the banker felt that he had done someth to nullifi on caus ofuneasi, and yet he wa scarc the easier. he did not measur thequant of diseas motiv which had made him wish for lydgat’sgood-will, but the quantiti wa none the less activ there, like anirrit agent in hi blood. a man vow, and yet will not cast awayth mean of break hi vow. is it that he distinctli mean to breakit? not at all; but the desir which tend to break it ar at work inhim dimli, and make their wai into hi imagin, and relax hismuscl in the veri moment when he is tell himself over again thereason for hi vow. raffl, recov quickli, return to the freeus of hi odiou power—how could bulstrod wish for that? rafflesdead wa the imag that brought releas, and indirectli he prai forthat wai of releas, beseech that, if it were possibl, the rest ofhi dai here below might be freed from the threat of an ignomini whichwould break him utterli as an instrument of god’s servic. lydgat’sopinion wa not on the side of promis that thi prayer would befulfil; and as the dai advanc, bulstrod felt himself gettingirrit at the persist life in thi man, whom he would fain haveseen sink into the silenc of death: imperi will stirredmurder impuls toward thi brute life, over which will, by itself,had no power. he said inwardli that he wa get too much worn; hewould not sit up with the patient to-night, but leav him to mr. abel,who, if necessari, could call her husband.at six o’clock, raffl, have had onli fit perturb snatch ofsleep, from which he wake with fresh restless and perpetu criesthat he wa sink awai, bulstrod began to administ the opiumaccord to lydgat’s direct. at the end of half an hour or moreh call mr. abel and told her that he found himself unfit forfurth watch. he must now consign the patient to her care; and heproceed to repeat to her lydgat’s direct as to the quantiti ofeach dose. mr. abel had not befor known anyth of lydgat’sprescript; she had simpli prepar and brought whatev bulstrodeord, and had done what he point out to her. she began now to askwhat els she should do besid administ the opium.“noth at present, except the offer of the soup or the soda-water:you can come to me for further direct. unless there is anyimport chang, i shall not come into the room again to-night. youwil ask your husband for help if necessari. i must go to bed earli.”“you’ve much need, sir, i’m sure,” said mr. abel, “and to takesometh more strengthen than what you’ve done.”bulstrod went awai now without anxieti as to what raffl might sai inhi rave, which had taken on a mutter incoher not like tocreat ani danger belief. at ani rate he must risk thi. he wentdown into the wainscot parlor first, and began to consid whether hewould not have hi hors saddl and go home by the moonlight, and giveup care for earthli consequ. then, he wish that he had beggedlydg to come again that even. perhap he might deliv adiffer opinion, and think that raffl wa get into a lesshop state. should he send for lydgat? if raffl were reallyget wors, and slowli dy, bulstrod felt that he could go to bedand sleep in gratitud to provid. but wa he wors? lydgat mightcom and simpli sai that he wa go on as he expect, and predictthat he would by-and-by fall into a good sleep, and get well. what wasth us of send for him? bulstrod shrank from that result. no ideasor opinion could hinder him from see the on probabl to be,that raffl recov would be just the same man as befor, with hisstrength as a tormentor renew, oblig him to drag awai hi wife tospend her year apart from her friend and nativ place, carri analien suspicion against him in her heart.he had sat an hour and a half in thi conflict by the firelight onli,when a sudden thought made him rise and light the bed-candl, which hehad brought down with him. the thought wa, that he had not told mr.abel when the dose of opium must ceas.he took hold of the candlestick, but stood motionless for a long while.she might alreadi have given him more than lydgat had prescrib. butit wa excus in him, that he should forget part of an order, in hispres weari condit. he walk up-stair, candl in hand, notknow whether he should straightwai enter hi own room and go to bed,or turn to the patient’s room and rectifi hi omiss. he paus inth passag, with hi face turn toward raffl’s room, and he couldhear him moan and murmur. he wa not asleep, then. who could knowthat lydgat’s prescript would not be better disobei thanfollow, sinc there wa still no sleep?he turn into hi own room. befor he had quit undress, mr. abelrap at the door; he open it an inch, so that he could hear herspeak low.“if you pleas, sir, should i have no brandi nor noth to give thepoor creetur? he feel sink awai, and noth els will heswal—and but littl strength in it, if he did—onli the opium. and hesai more and more he’s sink down through the earth.”to her surpris, mr. bulstrod did not answer. a struggl wa go onwithin him.“i think he must die for want o’ support, if he goe on in that wai.when i nurs my poor master, mr. robisson, i had to give him port-wineand brandi constant, and a big glass at a time,” ad mr. abel, witha touch of remonstr in her tone.but again mr. bulstrod did not answer immedi, and she continu,“it’s not a time to spare when peopl ar at death’s door, nor wouldyou wish it, sir, i’m sure. els i should give him our own bottl o’rum as we keep by us. but a sitter-up so as you’ve been, and doingeveryth as laid in your power—”here a kei wa thrust through the inch of doorwai, and mr. bulstrodesaid huskili, “that is the kei of the wine-cooler. you will find plentyof brandi there.”earli in the morn—about six—mr. bulstrod rose and spent some timein prayer. doe ani on suppos that privat prayer is necessarilycandid—necessarili goe to the root of action? privat prayer isinaud speech, and speech is repres: who can representhimself just as he is, even in hi own reflect? bulstrod had notyet unravel in hi thought the confus prompt of the lastfour-and-twenti hour.he listen in the passag, and could hear hard stertor breath.then he walk out in the garden, and look at the earli rime on thegrass and fresh spring leav. when he re-enter the hous, he feltstartl at the sight of mr. abel.“how is your patient—asleep, i think?” he said, with an attempt atcheer in hi tone.“he’s gone veri deep, sir,” said mr. abel. “he went off gradualbetween three and four o’clock. would you pleas to go and look at him?i thought it no harm to leav him. my man’s gone afield, and the littlegirl’s see to the kettl.”bulstrod went up. at a glanc he knew that raffl wa not in thesleep which bring reviv, but in the sleep which stream deeper anddeep into the gulf of death.he look round the room and saw a bottl with some brandi in it, andth almost empti opium phial. he put the phial out of sight, andcarri the brandi-bottl down-stair with him, lock it again in thewin-cooler.while breakfast he consid whether he should ride to middlemarchat onc, or wait for lydgat’s arriv. he decid to wait, and toldmr. abel that she might go about her work—he could watch in thebe-chamber.as he sat there and beheld the enemi of hi peac go irrevocablyinto silenc, he felt more at rest than he had done for mani month.hi conscienc wa sooth by the enfold wing of secreci, whichseem just then like an angel sent down for hi relief. he drew outhi pocket-book to review variou memoranda there as to thearrang he had project and partli carri out in the prospect ofquit middlemarch, and consid how far he would let them stand orrecal them, now that hi absenc would be brief. some economi whichh felt desir might still find a suitabl occas in hi temporarywithdraw from manag, and he hope still that mr. casaubon wouldtak a larg share in the expens of the hospit. in that wai themoment pass, until a chang in the stertor breath wa markedenough to draw hi attent wholli to the bed, and forc him to thinkof the depart life, which had onc been subservi to hi own—whichh had onc been glad to find base enough for him to act on as hewould. it wa hi glad then which impel him now to be glad thatth life wa at an end.and who could sai that the death of raffl had been hasten? who knewwhat would have save him?lydgat arriv at half-past ten, in time to wit the final paus ofth breath. when he enter the room bulstrod observ a suddenexpress in hi face, which wa not so much surpris as a recognitionthat he had not judg correctli. he stood by the bed in silenc forsom time, with hi ey turn on the dy man, but with that subduedact of express which show that he wa carri on an inwarddeb.“when did thi chang begin?” said he, look at bulstrod.“i did not watch by him last night,” said bulstrod. “i wa over-worn,and left him under mr. abel’s care. she said that he sank into sleepbetween three and four o’clock. when i came in befor eight he wasnearli in thi condit.”lydgat did not ask anoth question, but watch in silenc until hesaid, “it’s all over.”thi morn lydgat wa in a state of recov hope and freedom. hehad set out on hi work with all hi old anim, and felt himselfstrong enough to bear all the defici of hi marri life. and hewa consciou that bulstrod had been a benefactor to him. but he wasuneasi about thi case. he had not expect it to termin as it haddon. yet he hardli knew how to put a question on the subject tobulstrod without appear to insult him; and if he examin thehousekeep—why, the man wa dead. there seem to be no us inimpli that somebodi’s ignor or imprud had kill him. andaft all, he himself might be wrong.he and bulstrod rode back to middlemarch togeth, talk of manyth—chiefli cholera and the chanc of the reform bill in the houseof lord, and the firm resolv of the polit union. noth wassaid about raffl, except that bulstrod mention the necess ofhav a grave for him in lowick churchyard, and observ that, so fara he knew, the poor man had no connect, except rigg, whom he hadstat to be unfriendli toward him.on return home lydgat had a visit from mr. farebroth. the vicarhad not been in the town the dai befor, but the new that there wa anexecut in lydgat’s hous had got to lowick by the even, havingbeen carri by mr. spicer, shoemak and parish-clerk, who had it fromhi brother, the respect bell-hanger in lowick gate. sinc thateven when lydgat had come down from the billiard room with fredvinci, mr. farebroth’s thought about him had been rather gloomi.plai at the green dragon onc or often might have been a trifl inanoth man; but in lydgat it wa on of sever sign that he wasget unlik hi former self. he wa begin to do thing for whichh had formerli even an excess scorn. whatev certaindissatisfact in marriag, which some silli tinkl of gossip hadgiven him hint of, might have to do with thi chang, mr. farebrotherfelt sure that it wa chiefli connect with the debt which were beingmor and more distinctli report, and he began to fear that ani notionof lydgat’s have resourc or friend in the background must bequit illusori. the rebuff he had met with in hi first attempt to winlydg’s confid, disinclin him to a second; but thi new of theexecut be actual in the hous, determin the vicar to overcomehi reluct.lydgat had just dismiss a poor patient, in whom he wa muchinterest, and he came forward to put out hi hand—with an opench which surpris mr. farebroth. could thi too be a proudreject of sympathi and help? never mind; the sympathi and helpshould be offer.“how ar you, lydgat? i came to see you becaus i had heard somethingwhich made me anxiou about you,” said the vicar, in the tone of a goodbroth, onli that there wa no reproach in it. thei were both seatedbi thi time, and lydgat answer immedi—“i think i know what you mean. you had heard that there wa anexecut in the hous?”“ye; is it true?”“it wa true,” said lydgat, with an air of freedom, as if he did notmind talk about the affair now. “but the danger is over; the debt ispaid. i am out of my difficulti now: i shall be freed from debt, andabl, i hope, to start afresh on a better plan.”“i am veri thank to hear it,” said the vicar, fall back in hischair, and speak with that low-tone quick which often followsth remov of a load. “i like that better than all the new in the‘time.’ i confess i came to you with a heavi heart.”“thank you for come,” said lydgat, cordial. “i can enjoi thekind all the more becaus i am happier. i have certainli been agood deal crush. i’m afraid i shall find the bruis still painfulbi-and by,” he ad, smile rather sadli; “but just now i can onlyfeel that the tortur-screw is off.”mr. farebroth wa silent for a moment, and then said earnestli, “mydear fellow, let me ask you on question. forgiv me if i take aliberti.”“i don’t believ you will ask anyth that ought to offend me.”“then—thi is necessari to set my heart quit at rest—you have not—havey?—in order to pai your debt, incur anoth debt which mai harassy wors hereaft?”“no,” said lydgat, color slightli. “there is no reason why i shouldnot tell you—sinc the fact is so—that the person to whom i am indebtedi bulstrod. he ha made me a veri handsom advanc—a thousandpound—and he can afford to wait for repay.”“well, that is gener,” said mr. farebroth, compel himself toapprov of the man whom he dislik. hi delic feel shrank fromdwel even in hi thought on the fact that he had alwai urgedlydg to avoid ani person entangl with bulstrod. he addedimmedi, “and bulstrod must natur feel an interest in yourwelfar, after you have work with him in a wai which ha probablyreduc your incom instead of ad to it. i am glad to think that heha act accordingli.”lydgat felt uncomfort under these kindli supposit. thei mademor distinct within him the uneasi conscious which had shown itsfirst dim stir onli a few hour befor, that bulstrod’s motivesfor hi sudden benefic follow close upon the chillestindiffer might be mere selfish. he let the kindli suppositionspass. he could not tell the histori of the loan, but it wa morevividli present with him than ever, as well as the fact which the vicardel ignor—that thi relat of person indebted tobulstrod wa what he had onc been most resolv to avoid.he began, instead of answer, to speak of hi project economi,and of hi have come to look at hi life from a differ point ofview.“i shall set up a surgeri,” he said. “i realli think i made a mistakeneffort in that respect. and if rosamond will not mind, i shall take anapprentic. i don’t like these thing, but if on carri them outfaithfulli thei ar not realli lower. i have had a sever gall tobegin with: that will make the small rub seem easi.”poor lydgat! the “if rosamond will not mind,” which had fallen fromhim involuntarili as part of hi thought, wa a signific mark of theyok he bore. but mr. farebroth, whose hope enter strongli intoth same current with lydgat’s, and who knew noth about him thatcould now rais a melancholi presenti, left him with affectionatecongratul.chapter lxxi._clown_. . . . ’twa in the bunch of grape, where, inde,you have a delight to sit, have you not?_froth_. i have so: becaus it is an open room, and good for winter._clo_. why, veri well then: i hope here be truth.—_measur for measur_.five dai after the death of raffl, mr. bambridg wa stand at hisleisur under the larg archwai lead into the yard of the greendragon. he wa not fond of solitari contempl, but he had onli justcom out of the hous, and ani human figur stand at eas under thearchwai in the earli afternoon wa as certain to attract companionshipa a pigeon which ha found someth worth peck at. in thi casether wa no materi object to feed upon, but the ey of reason saw aprob of mental susten in the shape of gossip. mr. hopkin,the meek-manner draper opposit, wa the first to act on thi inwardvis, be the more ambiti of a littl masculin talk becaus hiscustom were chiefli women. mr. bambridg wa rather curt to thedrap, feel that hopkin wa of cours glad to talk to _him_, butthat he wa not go to wast much of hi talk on hopkin. soon,howev, there wa a small cluster of more import listen, whower either deposit from the passer-by, or had saunter to the spotexpressli to see if there were anyth go on at the green dragon;and mr. bambridg wa find it worth hi while to sai mani impressiveth about the fine stud he had been see and the purchas he hadmad on a journei in the north from which he had just return.gentlemen present were assur that when thei could show him anythingto cut out a blood mare, a bai, rise four, which wa to be seen atdoncast if thei chose to go and look at it, mr. bambridg wouldgratifi them by be shot “from here to hereford.” also, a pair ofblack which he wa go to put into the break recal vividli to hismind a pair which he had sold to faulkner in ’19, for a hundredguinea, and which faulkner had sold for a hundr and sixti two monthslat—ani gent who could disprov thi statement be offer theprivileg of call mr. bambridg by a veri ugli name until theexercis made hi throat dry.when the discours wa at thi point of anim, came up mr. frankhawlei. he wa not a man to compromis hi digniti by loung at thegreen dragon, but happen to pass along the high street and seeingbambridg on the other side, he took some of hi long stride across toask the horsedeal whether he had found the first-rate gig-hors whichh had engag to look for. mr. hawlei wa request to wait until hehad seen a grai select at bilklei: if that did not meet hi wish toa hair, bambridg did not know a hors when he saw it, which seem tobe the highest conceiv unlikelihood. mr. hawlei, stand with hisback to the street, wa fix a time for look at the grai andse it tri, when a horseman pass slowli by.“bulstrod!” said two or three voic at onc in a low tone, on ofthem, which wa the draper’s, respectfulli prefix the “mr.;” butnobodi have more intent in thi interjectur name than if theyhad said “the riverston coach” when that vehicl appear in thedist. mr. hawlei gave a careless glanc round at bulstrod’s back,but as bambridg’s ey follow it he made a sarcast grimac.“by jingo! that remind me,” he began, lower hi voic a littl, “ipick up someth els at bilklei besid your gig-hors, mr. hawlei.i pick up a fine stori about bulstrod. do you know how he came byhi fortun? ani gentleman want a bit of curiou inform, i cangiv it him free of expens. if everybodi got their desert, bulstrodemight have had to sai hi prayer at botani bai.”“what do you mean?” said mr. hawlei, thrust hi hand into hispocket, and push a littl forward under the archwai. if bulstrodeshould turn out to be a rascal, frank hawlei had a prophet soul.“i had it from a parti who wa an old chum of bulstrod’s. i’ll tellyou where i first pick him up,” said bambridg, with a sudden gestureof hi fore-finger. “he wa at larcher’s sale, but i knew noth ofhim then—he slip through my finger—wa after bulstrod, no doubt.he tell me he can tap bulstrod to ani amount, know all hi secret.howev, he blab to me at bilklei: he take a stiff glass. damm ifi think he meant to turn king’s evid; but he’s that sort ofbrag fellow, the brag run over hedg and ditch with him, tillh’d brag of a spavin as if it ’ud fetch monei. a man should know whento pull up.” mr. bambridg made thi remark with an air of disgust,satisfi that hi own brag show a fine sens of the market.“what’s the man’s name? where can he be found?” said mr. hawlei.“as to where he is to be found, i left him to it at the saracen’s head;but hi name is raffl.”“raffl!” exclaim mr. hopkin. “i furnish hi funer yesterdai.he wa buri at lowick. mr. bulstrod follow him. a veri decentfuner.” there wa a strong sensat among the listen. mr.bambridg gave an ejacul in which “brimston” wa the mildestword, and mr. hawlei, knit hi brow and bend hi head forward,exclaim, “what?—where did the man die?”“at stone court,” said the draper. “the housekeep said he wa arel of the master’s. he came there ill on fridai.”“why, it wa on wednesdai i took a glass with him,” interposedbambridg.“did ani doctor attend him?” said mr. hawlei“ye. mr. lydgat. mr. bulstrod sat up with him on night. he di thethird morn.”“go on, bambridg,” said mr. hawlei, insist. “what did thi fellowsai about bulstrod?”the group had alreadi becom larger, the town-clerk’s presenc be aguarante that someth worth listen to wa go on there; and mr.bambridg deliv hi narr in the hear of seven. it wasmainli what we know, includ the fact about will ladislaw, with someloc color and circumst ad: it wa what bulstrod had dreadedth betray of—and hope to have buri forev with the corps ofraffl—it wa that haunt ghost of hi earlier life which as he rodepast the archwai of the green dragon he wa trust that providencehad deliv him from. ye, provid. he had not confess tohimself yet that he had done anyth in the wai of contriv to thisend; he had accept what seem to have been offer. it wasimposs to prove that he had done anyth which hasten thedepartur of that man’s soul.but thi gossip about bulstrod spread through middlemarch like thesmel of fire. mr. frank hawlei follow up hi inform by sendinga clerk whom he could trust to stone court on a pretext of inquiringabout hai, but realli to gather all that could be learn about rafflesand hi ill from mr. abel. in thi wai it came to hi knowledgethat mr. garth had carri the man to stone court in hi gig; and mr.hawlei in consequ took an opportun of see caleb, call athi offic to ask whether he had time to undertak an arbitr if itwer requir, and then ask him incident about raffl. calebwa betrai into no word injuri to bulstrod beyond the fact whichh wa forc to admit, that he had given up act for him within thelast week. mr hawlei drew hi infer, and feel convinc thatraffl had told hi stori to garth, and that garth had given upbulstrod’s affair in consequ, said so a few hour later to mr.toller. the statement wa pass on until it had quit lost the stampof an infer, and wa taken as inform come straight fromgarth, so that even a dilig historian might have conclud caleb tobe the chief publish of bulstrod’s misdemeanor.mr. hawlei wa not slow to perceiv that there wa no handl for thelaw either in the revel made by raffl or in the circumstancesof hi death. he had himself ridden to lowick villag that he mightlook at the regist and talk over the whole matter with mr.farebroth, who wa not more surpris than the lawyer that an uglysecret should have come to light about bulstrod, though he had alwayshad justic enough in him to hinder hi antipathi from turn intoconclus. but while thei were talk anoth combin wassil go forward in mr. farebroth’s mind, which foreshadowedwhat wa soon to be loudli spoken of in middlemarch as a necessari“put of two and two togeth.” with the reason which keptbulstrod in dread of raffl there flash the thought that the dreadmight have someth to do with hi munific toward hi medicalman; and though he resist the suggest that it had been consciouslyaccept in ani wai as a bribe, he had a forebod that thiscompl of thing might be of malign effect on lydgat’sreput. he perceiv that mr. hawlei knew noth at present of thesudden relief from debt, and he himself wa care to glide awai fromal approach toward the subject.“well,” he said, with a deep breath, want to wind up the illimitablediscuss of what might have been, though noth could be legallyproven, “it is a strang stori. so our mercuri ladislaw ha a queergenealog! a high-spirit young ladi and a music polish patriot madea like enough stock for him to spring from, but i should never havesuspect a graft of the jew pawnbrok. howev, there’s no knowingwhat a mixtur will turn out beforehand. some sort of dirt serv toclarifi.”“it’s just what i should have expect,” said mr. hawlei, mount hishors. “ani curs alien blood, jew, corsican, or gypsi.”“i know he’s on of your black sheep, hawlei. but he is realli adisinterest, unworldli fellow,” said mr. farebroth, smile.“ay, ay, that is your whiggish twist,” said mr. hawlei, who had been inth habit of sai apologet that farebroth wa such a damnedpleas good-heart fellow you would mistak him for a tori.mr. hawlei rode home without think of lydgat’s attend onraffl in ani other light than as a piec of evid on the side ofbulstrod. but the new that lydgat had all at onc becom abl notonli to get rid of the execut in hi hous but to pai all hi debtsin middlemarch wa spread fast, gather round it conjectur andcom which gave it new bodi and impetu, and soon fill the earsof other person besid mr. hawlei, who were not slow to see asignific relat between thi sudden command of monei andbulstrod’s desir to stifl the scandal of raffl. that the moneycam from bulstrod would infal have been guess even if therehad been no direct evid of it; for it had beforehand enter intoth gossip about lydgat’s affair, that neither hi father-in-law norhi own famili would do anyth for him, and direct evid wasfurnish not onli by a clerk at the bank, but by innoc mr.bulstrod herself, who mention the loan to mr. plymdal, whoment it to her daughter-in-law of the hous of toller, whoment it gener. the busi wa felt to be so public andimport that it requir dinner to feed it, and mani invitationswer just then issu and accept on the strength of thi scandalconcern bulstrod and lydgat; wive, widow, and singl ladi tooktheir work and went out to tea often than usual; and all publicconvivi, from the green dragon to dollop’s, gather a zest whichcould not be won from the question whether the lord would throw outth reform bill.for hardli anybodi doubt that some scandal reason or other wa atth bottom of bulstrod’s liber to lydgat. mr. hawlei inde, inth first instanc, invit a select parti, includ the twophysician, with mr toller and mr. wrench, expressli to hold a closediscuss as to the probabl of raffl’s ill, recit tothem all the particular which had been gather from mr. abel inconnect with lydgat’s certif, that the death wa due todelirium tremen; and the medic gentlemen, who all stoodundisturbedli on the old path in relat to thi diseas, declaredthat thei could see noth in these particular which could betransform into a posit ground of suspicion. but the moral groundsof suspicion remain: the strong motiv bulstrod clearli had forwish to be rid of raffl, and the fact that at thi critic momenth had given lydgat the help which he must for some time have knownth need for; the disposit, moreov, to believ that bulstrodewould be unscrupul, and the absenc of ani indisposit to believethat lydgat might be as easili bribe as other haughti-mind men whenthei have found themselv in want of monei. even if the monei had beengiven mere to make him hold hi tongu about the scandal ofbulstrod’s earlier life, the fact threw an odiou light on lydgat,who had long been sneer at as make himself subservi to thebank for the sake of work himself into predomin, anddiscredit the elder member of hi profess. henc, in spite ofth neg as to ani direct sign of guilt in relat to the death atston court, mr. hawlei’s select parti broke up with the sens that theaffair had “an ugli look.”but thi vagu convict of indetermin guilt, which wa enough tokeep up much head-shake and bite innuendo even among substantialprofession senior, had for the gener mind all the superior powerof mysteri over fact. everybodi like better to conjectur how theth wa, than simpli to know it; for conjectur soon becam moreconfid than knowledg, and had a more liber allow for theincompat. even the more definit scandal concern bulstrod’searlier life wa, for some mind, melt into the mass of mysteri, asso much live metal to be pour out in dialogu, and to take suchfantast shape as heaven pleas.thi wa the tone of thought chiefli sanction by mr. dollop, thespirit landladi of the tankard in slaughter lane, who had often toresist the shallow pragmat of custom dispos to think that theirreport from the outer world were of equal forc with what had “comeup” in her mind. how it had been brought to her she didn’t know, but itwa there befor her as if it had been “score with the chalk on thechimnei-board—” as bulstrod should sai, “hi insid wa _that black_as if the hair of hi head know the thought of hi heart, he’d tear’em up by the root.”“that’s odd,” said mr. limp, a medit shoemak, with weak ey anda pipe voic. “why, i read in the ‘trumpet’ that wa what the duke ofwellington said when he turn hi coat and went over to the roman.”“veri like,” said mr. dollop. “if on raskil said it, it’s morereason why anoth should. but hypo_crite_ as he’s been, and holdingth with that high hand, as there wa no parson i’ the countri goodenough for him, he wa forc to take old harri into hi counsel, andold harri’s been too mani for him.”“ay, ay, he’s a ’complic you can’t send out o’ the countri,” said mr.crabb, the glazier, who gather much new and grope among it dimli.“but by what i can make out, there’s them sai bulstrod wa forrun awai, for fear o’ be found out, befor now.”“he’ll be drove awai, whether or no,” said mr. dill, the barber, whohad just drop in. “i shave fletcher, hawlei’s clerk, thismorn—he’s got a bad finger—and he sai thei’re all of on mind toget rid of bulstrod. mr. thesig is turn against him, and want himout o’ the parish. and there’s gentlemen in thi town sai thei’d assoon dine with a fellow from the hulk. ‘and a deal sooner i would,’sai fletcher; ‘for what’s more against on’s stomach than a man comingand make himself bad compani with hi religion, and give out as theten command ar not enough for him, and all the while he’s worsethan half the men at the tread-mill?’ fletcher said so himself.”“it’ll be a bad thing for the town though, if bulstrod’s monei goesout of it,” said mr. limp, quaveringli.“ah, there’s better folk spend their monei wors,” said a firm-voiceddy, whose crimson hand look out of keep with hi good-naturedfac.“but he won’t keep hi monei, by what i can make out,” said theglazi. “don’t thei sai as there’s somebodi can strip it off him? bywhat i can understan’, thei could take everi penni off him, if theywent to law.”“no such thing!” said the barber, who felt himself a littl abov hiscompani at dollop’s, but like it none the wors. “fletcher sai it’sno such thing. he sai thei might prove over and over again whose childthi young ladislaw wa, and thei’d do no more than if thei prove icam out of the fen—he couldn’t touch a penni.”“look you there now!” said mr. dollop, indignantli. “i thank the lordh took my children to himself, if that’s all the law can do for themotherless. then by that, it’s o’ no us who your father and mother is.but as to listen to what on lawyer sai without ask anoth—iwond at a man o’ your clever, mr. dill. it’s well known there’salwai two side, if no more; els who’d go to law, i should like toknow? it’s a poor tale, with all the law as there is up and down, ifit’s no us prove whose child you ar. fletcher mai sai that if helik, but i sai, don’t fletcher _me_!”mr. dill affect to laugh in a complimentari wai at mr. dollop, as awoman who wa more than a match for the lawyer; be dispos tosubmit to much twit from a landladi who had a long score againsthim.“if thei come to law, and it’s all true as folk sai, there’s moreto be look to nor monei,” said the glazier. “there’s thi poorcreetur as is dead and gone; by what i can make out, he’d seen the daywhen he wa a deal finer gentleman nor bulstrod.”“finer gentleman! i’ll warrant him,” said mr. dollop; “and a farpersonabl man, by what i can hear. as i said when mr. baldwin, thetax-gather, come in, a-stand where you sit, and sai, ‘bulstrodegot all hi monei as he brought into thi town by thiev andswindl,’—i said, ‘you don’t make me no wiser, mr. baldwin: it’s setmi blood a-creep to look at him ever sin’ here he came intoslaught lane a-want to bui the hous over my head: folk don’tlook the color o’ the dough-tub and stare at you as if thei want tose into your backbon for nothingk.’ that wa what i said, and mr.baldwin can bear me wit.”“and in the right of it too,” said mr. crabb. “for by what i can makeout, thi raffl, as thei call him, wa a lusti, fresh-color man asyou’d wish to see, and the best o’ compani—though dead he li inlowick churchyard sure enough; and by what i can understan’, there’sthem know more than thei _should_ know about how he got there.”“i’ll believ you!” said mr. dollop, with a touch of scorn at mr.crabb’s appar dim. “when a man’s been ’tice to a lone hous,and there’s them can pai for hospit and nurs for half thecountri-side choos to be sitter-up night and dai, and nobodi to comenear but a doctor as is known to stick at nothingk, and as poor as hecan hang togeth, and after that so flush o’ monei as he can pai offmr. byle the butcher as hi bill ha been run on for the best o’joint sinc last michaelma wa a twelvemonth—i don’t want anybodi tocom and tell me as there’s been more go on nor the prayer-book’sgot a servic for—i don’t want to stand wink and blink andthink.”mr. dollop look round with the air of a landladi accustom todomin her compani. there wa a choru of adhes from the morecourag; but mr. limp, after take a draught, place hi flat handstogeth and press them hard between hi knee, look down at themwith blear-ei contempl, as if the scorch power of mr.dollop’s speech had quit dri up and nullifi hi wit until theycould be brought round again by further moistur.“why shouldn’t thei dig the man up and have the crowner?” said thedyer. “it’s been done mani and mani’s the time. if there’s been foulplai thei might find it out.”“not thei, mr. jona!” said mr dollop, emphat. “i know whatdoctor ar. thei’re a deal too cun to be found out. and thisdoctor lydgat that’s been for cut up everybodi befor the breathwa well out o’ their bodi—it’s plain enough what us he want to makeo’ look into respect peopl’s insid. he know drug, you mayb sure, as you can neither smell nor see, neither befor thei’reswallow nor after. why, i’ve seen drop myself order by doctorgambit, as is our club doctor and a good charikt, and ha broughtmor live children into the world nor ever anoth i’ middlemarch—i sayi’ve seen drop myself as made no differ whether thei wa in theglass or out, and yet have gripe you the next dai. so i’ll leav yourown sens to judg. don’t tell me! all i sai is, it’s a merci theydidn’t take thi doctor lydgat on to our club. there’s mani a mother’schild might ha’ ru it.”the head of thi discuss at “dollop’s” had been the common themeamong all class in the town, had been carri to lowick parsonag onon side and to tipton grang on the other, had come fulli to the earsof the vinci famili, and had been discuss with sad refer to “poorharriet” by all mr. bulstrod’s friend, befor lydgat knewdistinctli why peopl were look strang at him, and beforebulstrod himself suspect the betray of hi secret. he had notbeen accustom to veri cordial relat with hi neighbor, and henceh could not miss the sign of cordial; moreov, he had been takingjournei on busi of variou kind, have now made up hi mind thath need not quit middlemarch, and feel abl consequ todetermin on matter which he had befor left in suspens.“we will make a journei to cheltenham in the cours of a month or two,”he had said to hi wife. “there ar great spiritu advantag to behad in that town along with the air and the water, and six week therewil be emin refresh to us.”he realli believ in the spiritu advantag, and meant that hi lifehenceforth should be the more devot becaus of those later sin whichh repres to himself as hypothet, prai hypothet fortheir pardon:—“if i have herein transgress.”as to the hospit, he avoid sai anyth further to lydgat,fear to manifest a too sudden chang of plan immedi on thedeath of raffl. in hi secret soul he believ that lydgat suspectedhi order to have been intention disobei, and suspect thi hemust also suspect a motiv. but noth had been betrai to him as toth histori of raffl, and bulstrod wa anxiou not to do anythingwhich would give emphasi to hi undefin suspicion. as to anycertainti that a particular method of treatment would either save orkil, lydgat himself wa constantli argu against such dogmat; hehad no right to speak, and he had everi motiv for be silent. hencebulstrod felt himself providenti secur. the onli incid he hadstrongli winc under had been an occasion encount with calebgarth, who, howev, had rais hi hat with mild graviti.meanwhil, on the part of the princip townsmen a strong determinationwa grow against him.a meet wa to be held in the town-hall on a sanitari question whichhad risen into press import by the occurr of a cholera casein the town. sinc the act of parliament, which had been hurriedlypass, author assess for sanitari measur, there had been aboard for the superintend of such measur appoint inmiddlemarch, and much cleans and prepar had been concur inbi whig and tori. the question now wa, whether a piec of groundoutsid the town should be secur as a burial-ground by mean ofassess or by privat subscript. the meet wa to be open, andalmost everybodi of import in the town wa expect to be there.mr. bulstrod wa a member of the board, and just befor twelv o’clockh start from the bank with the intent of urg the plan ofpriv subscript. under the hesit of hi project, he had forsom time kept himself in the background, and he felt that he shouldthi morn resum hi old posit as a man of action and influencein the public affair of the town where he expect to end hi dai.among the variou person go in the same direct, he saw lydgat;thei join, talk over the object of the meet, and enter ittogeth.it seem that everybodi of mark had been earlier than thei. but therewer still space left near the head of the larg central tabl, andthei made their wai thither. mr. farebroth sat opposit, not far frommr. hawlei; all the medic men were there; mr. thesig wa in thechair, and mr. brook of tipton wa on hi right hand.lydgat notic a peculiar interchang of glanc when he and bulstrodetook their seat.after the busi had been fulli open by the chairman, who pointedout the advantag of purchas by subscript a piec of groundlarg enough to be ultim us as a gener cemeteri, mr.bulstrod, whose rather high-pitch but subdu and fluent voic thetown wa us to at meet of thi sort, rose and ask leav todeliv hi opinion. lydgat could see again the peculiar interchangeof glanc befor mr. hawlei start up, and said in hi firm resonantvoic, “mr. chairman, i request that befor ani on deliv hisopinion on thi point i mai be permit to speak on a question ofpubl feel, which not onli by myself, but by mani gentlemenpres, is regard as preliminari.”mr. hawlei’s mode of speech, even when public decorum repress hi“aw languag,” wa formid in it curt and self-possess.mr. thesig sanction the request, mr. bulstrod sat down, and mr.hawlei continu.“in what i have to sai, mr. chairman, i am not speak simpli on myown behalf: i am speak with the concurr and at the expressrequest of no fewer than eight of my fellow-townsmen, who areimmedi around us. it is our unit sentiment that mr. bulstrodeshould be call upon—and i do now call upon him—to resign publicposit which he hold not simpli as a tax-payer, but as a gentlemanamong gentlemen. there ar practic and there ar act which, ow tocircumst, the law cannot visit, though thei mai be wors than manyth which ar legal punish. honest men and gentlemen, if theydon’t want the compani of peopl who perpetr such act, have got todefend themselv as thei best can, and that is what i and the friendswhom i mai call my client in thi affair ar determin to do. i don’tsai that mr. bulstrod ha been guilti of shame act, but i callupon him either publicli to deni and confut the scandal statementsmad against him by a man now dead, and who di in hi hous—thestat that he wa for mani year engag in nefari practic,and that he won hi fortun by dishonest procedur—or els to withdrawfrom posit which could onli have been allow him as a gentlemanamong gentlemen.”all ey in the room were turn on mr. bulstrod, who, sinc the firstment of hi name, had been go through a crisi of feel almosttoo violent for hi delic frame to support. lydgat, who himself wasundergo a shock as from the terribl practic interpret ofsom faint auguri, felt, nevertheless, that hi own movement ofres hatr wa check by that instinct of the healer whichthink first of bring rescu or relief to the suffer, when helook at the shrunken miseri of bulstrod’s livid face.the quick vision that hi life wa after all a failur, that he wa adishonor man, and must quail befor the glanc of those toward whomh had habitu assum the attitud of a reprov—that god haddisown him befor men and left him unscreen to the triumphant scornof those who were glad to have their hatr justifi—the sens ofutt futil in that equivoc with hi conscienc in deal withth life of hi accomplic, an equivoc which now turn venomouslyupon him with the full-grown fang of a discov lie:—all thi rushedthrough him like the agoni of terror which fail to kill, and leavesth ear still open to the return wave of execr. the suddensens of exposur after the re-establish sens of safeti came—not toth coars organ of a crimin, but to the suscept nerv ofa man whose intensest be lai in such masteri and predomin as thecondit of hi life had shape for him.but in that intens be lai the strength of reaction. through all hisbodili infirm there ran a tenaci nerv of ambitiousself-preserv will, which had continu leap out like a flame,scatter all doctrin fear, and which, even while he sat an objectof compass for the merci, wa begin to stir and glow underhi ashi pale. befor the last word were out of mr. hawlei’smouth, bulstrod felt that he should answer, and that hi answer wouldb a retort. he dare not get up and sai, “i am not guilti, the wholestori is fals”—even if he had dare thi, it would have seem to him,under hi present keen sens of betray, as vain as to pull, forcov to hi naked, a frail rag which would rend at everi littlestrain.for a few moment there wa total silenc, while everi man in the roomwa look at bulstrod. he sat perfectli still, lean hard againstth back of hi chair; he could not ventur to rise, and when he beganto speak he press hi hand upon the seat on each side of him. buthi voic wa perfectli audibl, though hoarser than usual, and hisword were distinctli pronounc, though he paus between sentenc asif short of breath. he said, turn first toward mr. thesig, andthen look at mr. hawlei—“i protest befor you, sir, as a christian minist, against thesanct of proceed toward me which ar dictat by virulenthatr. those who ar hostil to me ar glad to believ ani libelutt by a loos tongu against me. and their conscienc becomestrict against me. sai that the evil-speak of which i am to be madeth victim accus me of malpractic—” here bulstrod’s voic rose andtook on a more bite accent, till it seem a low cry—“who shall be myaccus? not men whose own live ar unchristian, nai, scandal—notmen who themselv us low instrument to carri out their end—whoseprofess is a tissu of chicaneri—who have been spend their incomeon their own sensual enjoy, while i have been devot mine toadvanc the best object with regard to thi life and the next.”after the word chicaneri there wa a grow nois, half of murmur andhalf of hiss, while four person start up at onc—mr. hawlei, mr.toller, mr. chich, and mr. hackbutt; but mr. hawlei’s outburst wasinstantan, and left the other behind in silenc.“if you mean me, sir, i call you and everi on els to the inspectionof my profession life. as to christian or unchristian, i repudiateyour cant palav christian; and as to the wai in which ispend my incom, it is not my principl to maintain thiev and cheatoffspr of their due inherit in order to support religion and setmyself up as a saintli killjoi. i affect no nice of conscienc—ihav not found ani nice standard necessari yet to measur your actionsbi, sir. and i again call upon you to enter into satisfactoryexplan concern the scandal against you, or els to withdrawfrom post in which we at ani rate declin you as a colleagu. i sai,sir, we declin to co-oper with a man whose charact is not clearedfrom infam light cast upon it, not onli by report but by recentact.”“allow me, mr. hawlei,” said the chairman; and mr. hawlei, stillfum, bow half impati, and sat down with hi hand thrust deepin hi pocket.“mr. bulstrod, it is not desir, i think, to prolong the presentdiscuss,” said mr. thesig, turn to the pallid trembl man; “imust so far concur with what ha fallen from mr. hawlei in expressionof a gener feel, as to think it due to your christian professionthat you should clear yourself, if possibl, from unhappi aspers. ifor my part should be will to give you full opportun and hear.but i must sai that your present attitud is painfulli inconsistentwith those principl which you have sought to identifi yourself with,and for the honor of which i am bound to care. i recommend you atpres, as your clergyman, and on who hope for your reinstat inrespect, to quit the room, and avoid further hindranc to busi.”bulstrod, after a moment’s hesit, took hi hat from the floor andslowli rose, but he grasp the corner of the chair so totteringli thatlydg felt sure there wa not strength enough in him to walk awaywithout support. what could he do? he could not see a man sink close tohim for want of help. he rose and gave hi arm to bulstrod, and inthat wai led him out of the room; yet thi act, which might have beenon of gentl duti and pure compass, wa at thi moment unspeakablybitt to him. it seem as if he were put hi sign-manual to thatassoci of himself with bulstrod, of which he now saw the fullmean as it must have present itself to other mind. he now feltth convict that thi man who wa lean tremblingli on hi arm,had given him the thousand pound as a bribe, and that somehow thetreat of raffl had been tamper with from an evil motiv. theinfer were close link enough; the town knew of the loan,believ it to be a bribe, and believ that he took it as a bribe.poor lydgat, hi mind struggl under the terribl clutch of thisrevel, wa all the while moral forc to take mr. bulstrod toth bank, send a man off for hi carriag, and wait to accompani himhom.meanwhil the busi of the meet wa despatch, and fring offinto eager discuss among variou group concern thi affair ofbulstrod—and lydgat.mr. brook, who had befor heard onli imperfect hint of it, and wasveri uneasi that he had “gone a littl too far” in countenancingbulstrod, now got himself fulli inform, and felt some benevolentsad in talk to mr. farebroth about the ugli light in whichlydg had come to be regard. mr. farebroth wa go to walk backto lowick.“step into my carriag,” said mr. brook. “i am go round to see mr.casaubon. she wa to come back from yorkshir last night. she will liketo see me, you know.”so thei drove along, mr. brook chat with good-natur hope thatther had not realli been anyth black in lydgat’s behavior—a youngfellow whom he had seen to be quit abov the common mark, when hebrought a letter from hi uncl sir godwin. mr. farebroth saidlittl: he wa deepli mourn: with a keen percept of humanweak, he could not be confid that under the pressur ofhumili need lydgat had not fallen below himself.when the carriag drove up to the gate of the manor, dorothea wa outon the gravel, and came to greet them.“well, my dear,” said mr. brook, “we have just come from a meet—asanitari meet, you know.”“wa mr. lydgat there?” said dorothea, who look full of health andanim, and stood with her head bare under the gleam aprillight. “i want to see him and have a great consult with him aboutth hospit. i have engag with mr. bulstrod to do so.”“oh, my dear,” said mr. brook, “we have been hear bad new—badnew, you know.”thei walk through the garden toward the churchyard gate, mr.farebroth want to go on to the parsonag; and dorothea heard thewhol sad stori.she listen with deep interest, and beg to hear twice over thefact and impress concern lydgat. after a short silenc,paus at the churchyard gate, and address mr. farebroth, shesaid energet—“you don’t believ that mr. lydgat is guilti of anyth base? i willnot believ it. let us find out the truth and clear him!”book viii.sunset and sunris.chapter lxxii.full soul ar doubl mirror, make stillan endless vista of fair thing befor,repeat thing behind.dorothea’s impetu generos, which would have leap at onc to thevind of lydgat from the suspicion of have accept monei as abrib, underw a melancholi check when she came to consid all thecircumst of the case by the light of mr. farebroth’s experi.“it is a delic matter to touch,” he said. “how can we begin toinquir into it? it must be either publicli by set the magistrateand coron to work, or privat by question lydgat. as to thefirst proceed there is no solid ground to go upon, els hawlei wouldhav adopt it; and as to open the subject with lydgat, i confessi should shrink from it. he would probabl take it as a deadli insult.i have more than onc experienc the difficulti of speak to him onperson matter. and—on should know the truth about hi conductbeforehand, to feel veri confid of a good result.”“i feel convinc that hi conduct ha not been guilti: i believ thatpeopl ar almost alwai better than their neighbor think thei ar,”said dorothea. some of her intensest experi in the last two yearshad set her mind strongli in opposit to ani unfavor constructionof other; and for the first time she felt rather discont with mr.farebroth. she dislik thi cautiou weigh of consequ,instead of an ardent faith in effort of justic and merci, which wouldconqu by their emot forc. two dai afterward, he wa dine atth manor with her uncl and the chettam, and when the dessert wasstand uneaten, the servant were out of the room, and mr. brook wasnod in a nap, she return to the subject with renew vivac.“mr. lydgat would understand that if hi friend hear a calumni abouthim their first wish must be to justifi him. what do we live for, if iti not to make life less difficult to each other? i cannot beindiffer to the troubl of a man who advis me in _my_ troubl,and attend me in my ill.”dorothea’s tone and manner were not more energet than thei had beenwhen she wa at the head of her uncl’s tabl nearli three yearsbefor, and her experi sinc had given her more right to express adecid opinion. but sir jame chettam wa no longer the diffid andacquiesc suitor: he wa the anxiou brother-in-law, with a devoutadmir for hi sister, but with a constant alarm lest she shouldfal under some new illus almost as bad as marri casaubon. hesmil much less; when he said “exactli” it wa more often anintroduct to a dissenti opinion than in those submiss bachelordai; and dorothea found to her surpris that she had to resolv not tobe afraid of him—all the more becaus he wa realli her best friend. hedisagre with her now.“but, dorothea,” he said, remonstrantli, “you can’t undertak to managea man’s life for him in that wai. lydgat must know—at least he willsoon come to know how he stand. if he can clear himself, he will. hemust act for himself.”“i think hi friend must wait till thei find an opportun,” addedmr. farebroth. “it is possibl—i have often felt so much weak inmyself that i can conceiv even a man of honor disposit, such asi have alwai believ lydgat to be, succumb to such a temptationa that of accept monei which wa offer more or less indirectli asa bribe to insur hi silenc about scandal fact long gone by. isai, i can conceiv thi, if he were under the pressur of hardcircumst—if he had been harass as i feel sure lydgat ha been.i would not believ anyth wors of him except under stringent proof.but there is the terribl nemesi follow on some error, that it isalwai possibl for those who like it to interpret them into a crime:there is no proof in favor of the man outsid hi own conscious andassert.”“oh, how cruel!” said dorothea, clasp her hand. “and would you notlik to be the on person who believ in that man’s innoc, if therest of the world beli him? besid, there is a man’s characterbeforehand to speak for him.”“but, my dear mr. casaubon,” said mr. farebroth, smile gentli ather ardor, “charact is not cut in marbl—it is not someth solidand unalter. it is someth live and chang, and mai becomediseas as our bodi do.”“then it mai be rescu and heal,” said dorothea “i should not beafraid of ask mr. lydgat to tell me the truth, that i might helphim. why should i be afraid? now that i am not to have the land, jame,i might do as mr. bulstrod propos, and take hi place in providingfor the hospit; and i have to consult mr. lydgat, to know thoroughlywhat ar the prospect of do good by keep up the present plan.there is the best opportun in the world for me to ask for hisconfid; and he would be abl to tell me thing which might make allth circumst clear. then we would all stand by him and bring himout of hi troubl. peopl glorifi all sort of braveri except thebraveri thei might show on behalf of their nearest neighbor.”dorothea’s ey had a moist bright in them, and the chang tonesof her voic rous her uncl, who began to listen.“it is true that a woman mai ventur on some effort of sympathi whichwould hardli succe if we men undertook them,” said mr. farebroth,almost convert by dorothea’s ardor.“sure, a woman is bound to be cautiou and listen to those who knowth world better than she doe.” said sir jame, with hi littl frown.“whatev you do in the end, dorothea, you should realli keep back atpres, and not volunt ani meddl with thi bulstrod busi.we don’t know yet what mai turn up. you must agre with me?” he end,look at mr. farebroth.“i do think it would be better to wait,” said the latter.“ye, ye, my dear,” said mr. brook, not quit know at what pointth discuss had arriv, but come up to it with a contributionwhich wa gener appropri. “it is easi to go too far, you know.you must not let your idea run awai with you. and as to be in ahurri to put monei into scheme—it won’t do, you know. garth ha drawnm in uncommonli with repair, drain, that sort of thing: i’muncommonli out of pocket with on thing or anoth. i must pull up. asfor you, chettam, you ar spend a fortun on those oak fenc roundyour demesn.”dorothea, submit uneasili to thi discourag, went with celiainto the librari, which wa her usual draw-room.“now, dodo, do listen to what jame sai,” said celia, “els you willb get into a scrape. you alwai did, and you alwai will, when youset about do as you pleas. and i think it is a merci now after allthat you have got jame to think for you. he let you have your plan,onli he hinder you from be taken in. and that is the good of havinga brother instead of a husband. a husband would not let you have yourplan.”“as if i want a husband!” said dorothea. “i onli want not to have myfeel check at everi turn.” mr. casaubon wa still undisciplinedenough to burst into angri tear.“now, realli, dodo,” said celia, with rather a deeper guttur thanusu, “you _ar_ contradictori: first on thing and then anoth. youus to submit to mr. casaubon quit shamefulli: i think you would havegiven up ever come to see me if he had ask you.”“of cours i submit to him, becaus it wa my duti; it wa myfeel for him,” said dorothea, look through the prism of hertear.“then why can’t you think it your duti to submit a littl to what jameswish?” said celia, with a sens of stringenc in her argument.“becaus he onli wish what is for your own good. and, of cours, menknow best about everyth, except what women know better.” dorothealaugh and forgot her tear.“well, i mean about babi and those thing,” explain celia. “ishould not give up to jame when i knew he wa wrong, as you us to doto mr. casaubon.”chapter lxxiii.piti the laden on; thi wander woemai visit you and me.when lydgat had allai mr. bulstrod’s anxieti by tell her thather husband had been seiz with faint at the meet, but that hetrust soon to see him better and would call again the next dai,unless she sent for him earlier, he went directli home, got on hishors, and rode three mile out of the town for the sake of be outof reach.he felt himself becom violent and unreason as if rage underth pain of sting: he wa readi to curs the dai on which he had cometo middlemarch. everyth that bad happen to him there seem a mereprepar for thi hate fatal, which had come as a blight onhi honor ambit, and must make even peopl who had onli vulgarstandard regard hi reput as irrevoc damag. in such momentsa man can hardli escap be unlov. lydgat thought of himself asth suffer, and of other as the agent who had injur hi lot. hehad meant everyth to turn out differ; and other had thrustthemselv into hi life and thwart hi purpos. hi marriag seemedan unmitig calam; and he wa afraid of go to rosamond beforeh had vent himself in thi solitari rage, lest the mere sight of hershould exasper him and make him behav unwarrant. there areepisod in most men’s live in which their highest qualiti can onlycast a deter shadow over the object that fill their inward vision:lydgat’s tenderhearted wa present just then onli as a dread lesth should offend against it, not as an emot that swai him totend. for he wa veri miser. onli those who know thesupremaci of the intellectu life—the life which ha a seed ofennobl thought and purpos within it—can understand the grief of onewho fall from that seren activ into the absorb soul-wastingstruggl with worldli annoy.how wa he to live on without vindic himself among peopl whosuspect him of base? how could he go silent awai frommiddlemarch as if he were retreat befor a just condemn? andyet how wa he to set about vindic himself?for that scene at the meet, which he had just wit, although ithad told him no particular, had been enough to make hi own situationthoroughli clear to him. bulstrod had been in dread of scandalousdisclosur on the part of raffl. lydgat could now construct all theprob of the case. “he wa afraid of some betray in myhear: all he want wa to bind me to him by a strong oblig:that wa why he pass on a sudden from hard to liber. and hemai have tamper with the patient—he mai have disobei my order. ifear he did. but whether he did or not, the world believ that hesomehow or other poison the man and that i wink at the crime, if ididn’t help in it. and yet—and yet he mai not be guilti of the lastoff; and it is just possibl that the chang toward me mai havebeen a genuin relent—the effect of second thought such as healleg. what we call the ‘just possibl’ is sometim true and theth we find it easier to believ is grossli fals. in hi lastdeal with thi man bulstrod mai have kept hi hand pure, in spiteof my suspicion to the contrari.”there wa a benumb cruelti in hi posit. even if he renouncedeveri other consider than that of justifi himself—if he metshrug, cold glanc, and avoid as an accus, and made a publicstat of all the fact as he knew them, who would be convinc? itwould be plai the part of a fool to offer hi own testimoni onbehalf of himself, and sai, “i did not take the monei as a bribe.” thecircumst would alwai be stronger than hi assert. and besid,to come forward and tell everyth about himself must includedeclar about bulstrod which would darken the suspicion ofoth against him. he must tell that he had not known of raffl’sexist when he first mention hi press need of monei tobulstrod, and that he took the monei innoc as a result of thatcommun, not know that a new motiv for the loan might havearisen on hi be call in to thi man. and after all, the suspicionof bulstrod’s motiv might be unjust.but then came the question whether he should have act in preciselyth same wai if he had not taken the monei? certainli, if raffl hadcontinu aliv and suscept of further treatment when he arriv,and he had then imagin ani disobedi to hi order on the part ofbulstrod, he would have made a strict inquiri, and if hi conjecturehad been verifi he would have thrown up the case, in spite of hisrec heavi oblig. but if he had not receiv ani monei—ifbulstrod had never revok hi cold recommend of bankruptci—wouldh, lydgat, have abstain from all inquiri even on find the mandead?—would the shrink from an insult to bulstrod—would thedubi of all medic treatment and the argument that hi owntreat would pass for the wrong with most member of hisprofess—have had just the same forc or signific with him?that wa the uneasi corner of lydgat’s conscious while he wasreview the fact and resist all reproach. if he had beenindepend, thi matter of a patient’s treatment and the distinct rulethat he must do or see done that which he believ best for the lifecommit to him, would have been the point on which he would have beenth sturdiest. as it wa, he had rest in the consider thatdisobedi to hi order, howev it might have arisen, could not beconsid a crime, that in the domin opinion obedi to hisord wa just as like to be fatal, and that the affair wa simplyon of etiquett. wherea, again and again, in hi time of freedom, hehad denounc the pervers of patholog doubt into moral doubt andhad said—“the purest experi in treatment mai still beconscienti: my busi is to take care of life, and to do the besti can think of for it. scienc is properli more scrupul than dogma.dogma give a charter to mistak, but the veri breath of scienc is acontest with mistak, and must keep the conscienc aliv.” ala! thescientif conscienc had got into the debas compani of moneyoblig and selfish respect.“is there a medic man of them all in middlemarch who would questionhimself as i do?” said poor lydgat, with a renew outburst ofrebellion against the oppress of hi lot. “and yet thei will allfeel warrant in make a wide space between me and them, as if i werea leper! my practic and my reput ar utterli damn—i can seethat. even if i could be clear by valid evid, it would makelittl differ to the bless world here. i have been set down astaint and should be cheapen to them all the same.”alreadi there had been abund sign which had hitherto puzzl him,that just when he had been pai off hi debt and get cheerfullyon hi feet, the townsmen were avoid him or look strang athim, and in two instanc it came to hi knowledg that patient of hishad call in anoth practition. the reason were too plain now. thegener black-ball had begun.no wonder that in lydgat’s energet natur the sens of a hopelessmisconstruct easili turn into a dog resist. the scowl whichoccasion show itself on hi squar brow wa not a meaninglessaccid. alreadi when he wa re-enter the town after that ridetaken in the first hour of sting pain, he wa set hi mind onremain in middlemarch in spite of the worst that could be doneagainst him. he would not retreat befor calumni, as if he submit toit. he would face it to the utmost, and no act of hi should show thath wa afraid. it belong to the generos as well as defiant forceof hi natur that he resolv not to shrink from show to the fullhi sens of oblig to bulstrod. it wa true that the associationwith thi man had been fatal to him—true that if he had had thethousand pound still in hi hand with all hi debt unpaid he wouldhav return the monei to bulstrod, and taken beggari rather than therescu which had been sulli with the suspicion of a bribe (for,rememb, he wa on of the proudest among the son ofmen)—nevertheless, he would not turn awai from thi crushedfellow-mortal whose aid he had us, and make a piti effort to getacquitt for himself by howl against anoth. “i shall do as ithink right, and explain to nobodi. thei will try to starv me out,but—” he wa go on with an obstin resolv, but he wa gettingnear home, and the thought of rosamond urg itself again into thatchief place from which it had been thrust by the agon struggl ofwound honor and pride.how would rosamond take it all? here wa anoth weight of chain todrag, and poor lydgat wa in a bad mood for bear her dumb masteri.he had no impuls to tell her the troubl which must soon be common tothem both. he prefer wait for the incident disclosur whichev must soon bring about.chapter lxxiv.“mercifulli grant that we mai grow ag togeth.”—book of tobit: _marriag prayer_.in middlemarch a wife could not long remain ignor that the town helda bad opinion of her husband. no feminin intim might carri herfriendship so far as to make a plain statement to the wife of theunpleas fact known or believ about her husband; but when a womanwith her thought much at leisur got them suddenli emploi onsometh grievous disadvantag to her neighbor, variou moralimpuls were call into plai which tend to stimul utter.candor wa on. to be candid, in middlemarch phraseolog, meant, to usean earli opportun of let your friend know that you did not takea cheer view of their capac, their conduct, or their posit;and a robust candor never wait to be ask for it opinion. then,again, there wa the love of truth—a wide phrase, but mean in thisrel, a live object to see a wife look happier than herhusband’s charact warrant, or manifest too much satisfact in herlot—the poor thing should have some hint given her that if she knew thetruth she would have less complac in her bonnet, and in lightdish for a supper-parti. stronger than all, there wa the regard fora friend’s moral improv, sometim call her soul, which waslik to be benefit by remark tend to gloom, utter with theaccompani of pensiv stare at the furnitur and a manner implyingthat the speaker would not tell what wa on her mind, from regard toth feel of her hearer. on the whole, on might sai that an ardentchar wa at work set the virtuou mind to make a neighborunhappi for her good.there were hardli ani wive in middlemarch whose matrimonialmisfortun would in differ wai be like to call forth more ofthi moral activ than rosamond and her aunt bulstrod. mr.bulstrod wa not an object of dislik, and had never consciouslyinjur ani human be. men had alwai thought her a handsomecomfort woman, and had reckon it among the sign of bulstrod’shypocrisi that he had chosen a red-blood vinci, instead of a ghastlyand melancholi person suit to hi low esteem for earthli pleasur.when the scandal about her husband wa disclos thei remark ofher—“ah, poor woman! she’s as honest as the dai—_she_ never suspectedanyth wrong in him, you mai depend on it.” women, who were intimatewith her, talk togeth much of “poor harriet,” imagin what herfeel must be when she came to know everyth, and conjectur howmuch she had alreadi come to know. there wa no spite dispositiontoward her; rather, there wa a busi benevol anxiou to ascertainwhat it would be well for her to feel and do under the circumst,which of cours kept the imagin occupi with her charact andhistori from the time when she wa harriet vinci till now. with thereview of mr. bulstrod and her posit it wa inevit toassoci rosamond, whose prospect were under the same blight with heraunt’s. rosamond wa more sever criticis and less piti, thoughsh too, as on of the good old vinci famili who had alwai been knownin middlemarch, wa regard as a victim to marriag with aninterlop. the vinci had their weak, but then thei lai on thesurfac: there wa never anyth bad to be “found out” concerningthem. mr. bulstrod wa vindic from ani resembl to herhusband. harriet’s fault were her own.“she ha alwai been showi,” said mr. hackbutt, make tea for a smallparti, “though she ha got into the wai of put her religionforward, to conform to her husband; she ha tri to hold her head upabov middlemarch by make it known that she invit clergymen andheaven-know-who from riverston and those place.”“we can hardli blame her for that,” said mr. spragu; “becaus few ofth best peopl in the town care to associ with bulstrod, and shemust have somebodi to sit down at her tabl.”“mr. thesig ha alwai countenanc him,” said mr. hackbutt. “ithink he must be sorri now.”“but he wa never fond of him in hi heart—that everi on know,” saidmr. tom toller. “mr. thesig never goe into extrem. he keep toth truth in what is evangel. it is onli clergymen like mr. tyke,who want to us dissent hymn-book and that low kind of religion,who ever found bulstrod to their tast.”“i understand, mr. tyke is in great distress about him,” said mr.hackbutt. “and well he mai be: thei sai the bulstrod have half keptth tyke famili.”“and of cours it is a discredit to hi doctrin,” said mr. spragu,who wa elderli, and old-fashion in her opinion.“peopl will not make a boast of be methodist in middlemarch fora good while to come.”“i think we must not set down peopl’s bad action to their religion,”said falcon-face mr. plymdal, who had been listen hitherto.“oh, my dear, we ar forget,” said mr. spragu. “we ought not tobe talk of thi befor you.”“i am sure i have no reason to be partial,” said mr. plymdal,color. “it’s true mr. plymdal ha alwai been on good term withmr. bulstrod, and harriet vinci wa my friend long befor she marriedhim. but i have alwai kept my own opinion and told her where she waswrong, poor thing. still, in point of religion, i must sai, mr.bulstrod might have done what he ha, and wors, and yet have been aman of no religion. i don’t sai that there ha not been a littl toomuch of that—i like moder myself. but truth is truth. the mentri at the assiz ar not all over-religi, i suppos.”“well,” said mr. hackbutt, wheel adroitli, “all i can sai is, thati think she ought to separ from him.”“i can’t sai that,” said mr. spragu. “she took him for better orwors, you know.”“but ‘wors’ can never mean find out that your husband is fit fornewg,” said mr. hackbutt. “fanci live with such a man! i shouldexpect to be poison.”“ye, i think myself it is an encourag to crime if such men ar tobe taken care of and wait on by good wive,” said mr. tom toller.“and a good wife poor harriet ha been,” said mr. plymdal. “shethink her husband the first of men. it’s true he ha never deni heranyth.”“well, we shall see what she will do,” said mr. hackbutt. “i supposesh know noth yet, poor creatur. i do hope and trust i shall notse her, for i should be frighten to death lest i should sai anythingabout her husband. do you think ani hint ha reach her?”“i should hardli think so,” said mr. tom toller. “we hear that _he_ isil, and ha never stir out of the hous sinc the meet onthursdai; but she wa with her girl at church yesterdai, and thei hadnew tuscan bonnet. her own had a feather in it. i have never seen thather religion made ani differ in her dress.”“she wear veri neat pattern alwai,” said mr. plymdal, a littlestung. “and that feather i know she got dy a pale lavend on purposeto be consist. i must sai it of harriet that she wish to doright.”“as to her know what ha happen, it can’t be kept from her long,”said mr. hackbutt. “the vinci know, for mr. vinci wa at the meet.it will be a great blow to him. there is hi daughter as well as hissist.”“ye, inde,” said mr. spragu. “nobodi suppos that mr. lydgat cango on hold up hi head in middlemarch, thing look so black aboutth thousand pound he took just at that man’s death. it realli makeson shudder.”“pride must have a fall,” said mr. hackbutt.“i am not so sorri for rosamond vinci that wa as i am for her aunt,”said mr. plymdal. “she need a lesson.”“i suppos the bulstrod will go and live abroad somewher,” said mr.spragu. “that is what is gener done when there is anythingdisgrac in a famili.”“and a most deadli blow it will be to harriet,” said mr. plymdal. “ifev a woman wa crush, she will be. i piti her from my heart. andwith all her fault, few women ar better. from a girl she had theneatest wai, and wa alwai good-heart, and as open as the dai. youmight look into her drawer when you would—alwai the same. and so sheha brought up kate and ellen. you mai think how hard it will be forher to go among foreign.”“the doctor sai that is what he should recommend the lydgat to do,”said mr. spragu. “he sai lydgat ought to have kept among thefrench.”“that would suit _her_ well enough, i dare sai,” said mr. plymdal;“there is that kind of light about her. but she got that from hermoth; she never got it from her aunt bulstrod, who alwai gave hergood advic, and to my knowledg would rather have had her marryelsewher.”mr. plymdal wa in a situat which caus her some complic offeel. there had been not onli her intimaci with mr. bulstrod, butalso a profit busi relat of the great plymdal dye housewith mr. bulstrod, which on the on hand would have inclin her todesir that the mildest view of hi charact should be the true on,but on the other, made her the more afraid of seem to palliat hisculp. again, the late allianc of her famili with the tollershad brought her in connect with the best circl, which gratifi herin everi direct except in the inclin to those seriou viewswhich she believ to be the best in anoth sens. the sharp littlewoman’s conscienc wa somewhat troubl in the adjust of theseoppos “best,” and of her grief and satisfact under lateev, which were like to humbl those who need humbl, but alsoto fall heavili on her old friend whose fault she would have preferredse on a background of prosper.poor mr. bulstrod, meanwhil, had been no further shaken by theoncom tread of calam than in the busier stir of that secretuneasi which had alwai been present in her sinc the last visit ofraffl to the shrub. that the hate man had come ill to stonecourt, and that her husband had chosen to remain there and watch overhim, she allow to be explain by the fact that raffl had beenemploi and aid in earlier-dai, and that thi made a tie ofbenevol toward him in hi degrad helpless; and she had beensinc then innoc cheer by her husband’s more hope speechabout hi own health and abil to continu hi attent to busi.the calm wa disturb when lydgat had brought him home ill from themeet, and in spite of comfort assur dure the next fewdai, she cri in privat from the convict that her husband wa notsuff from bodili ill mere, but from someth that afflictedhi mind. he would not allow her to read to him, and scarc to sitwith him, alleg nervou suscept to sound and movement; yetsh suspect that in shut himself up in hi privat room he wantedto be busi with hi paper. someth, she felt sure, had happen.perhap it wa some great loss of monei; and she wa kept in the dark.not dare to question her husband, she said to lydgat, on the fifthdai after the meet, when she had not left home except to go tochurch—“mr. lydgat, prai be open with me: i like to know the truth. hasanyth happen to mr. bulstrod?”“some littl nervou shock,” said lydgat, evas. he felt that itwa not for him to make the pain revel.“but what brought it on?” said mr. bulstrod, look directli at himwith her larg dark ey.“there is often someth poison in the air of public room,” saidlydg. “strong men can stand it, but it tell on peopl in proportionto the delicaci of their system. it is often imposs to account forth precis moment of an attack—or rather, to sai why the strengthgiv wai at a particular moment.”mr. bulstrod wa not satisfi with thi answer. there remain inher the belief that some calam had befallen her husband, of whichsh wa to be kept in ignor; and it wa in her natur strongli toobject to such conceal. she beg leav for her daughter to sitwith their father, and drove into the town to pai some visit,conjectur that if anyth were known to have gone wrong in mr.bulstrod’s affair, she should see or hear some sign of it.she call on mr. thesig, who wa not at home, and then drove tomr. hackbutt’s on the other side of the churchyard. mr. hackbutt sawher come from an up-stair window, and rememb her former alarmlest she should meet mr. bulstrod, felt almost bound in consistencyto send word that she wa not at home; but against that, there wa asudden strong desir within her for the excit of an interview inwhich she wa quit determin not to make the slightest allus towhat wa in her mind.henc mr. bulstrod wa shown into the draw-room, and mr. hackbuttw to her, with more tight of lip and rub of her hand thanwa usual observ in her, these be precaut adopt againstfreedom of speech. she wa resolv not to ask how mr. bulstrod wa.“i have not been anywher except to church for nearli a week,” saidmr. bulstrod, after a few introductori remark. “but mr. bulstrodewa taken so ill at the meet on thursdai that i have not like toleav the hous.”mr. hackbutt rub the back of on hand with the palm of the otherheld against her chest, and let her ey rambl over the pattern on therug.“wa mr. hackbutt at the meet?” persev mr. bulstrod.“ye, he wa,” said mr. hackbutt, with the same attitud. “the land isto be bought by subscript, i believ.”“let us hope that there will be no more case of cholera to be buriedin it,” said mr. bulstrod. “it is an aw visit. but i alwaysthink middlemarch a veri healthi spot. i suppos it is be us to itfrom a child; but i never saw the town i should like to live at better,and especi our end.”“i am sure i should be glad that you alwai should live at middlemarch,mr. bulstrod,” said mr. hackbutt, with a slight sigh. “still, wemust learn to resign ourselv, wherev our lot mai be cast. though iam sure there will alwai be peopl in thi town who will wish youwel.”mr. hackbutt long to sai, “if you take my advic you will part fromyour husband,” but it seem clear to her that the poor woman knewnoth of the thunder readi to bolt on her head, and she herself coulddo no more than prepar her a littl. mr. bulstrod felt suddenlyrath chill and trembl: there wa evid someth unusualbehind thi speech of mr. hackbutt’s; but though she had set out withth desir to be fulli inform, she found herself unabl now to pursueh brave purpos, and turn the convers by an inquiri about theyoung hackbutt, she soon took her leav sai that she wa go tose mr. plymdal. on her wai thither she tri to imagin that theremight have been some unusu warm spar at the meet between mr.bulstrod and some of hi frequent oppon—perhap mr. hackbutt mighthav been on of them. that would account for everyth.but when she wa in convers with mr. plymdal that comfortingexplan seem no longer tenabl. “selina” receiv her with apathet affection and a disposit to give edifi answer onth commonest topic, which could hardli have refer to an ordinaryquarrel of which the most import consequ wa a perturb ofmr. bulstrod’s health. beforehand mr. bulstrod had thought that shewould sooner question mr. plymdal than ani on els; but she found toher surpris that an old friend is not alwai the person whom it iseasiest to make a confid of: there wa the barrier of rememberedcommun under other circumst—there wa the dislik of beingpiti and inform by on who had been long wont to allow her thesuperior. for certain word of mysteri appropri that mr.plymdal let fall about her resolut never to turn her back on herfriend, convinc mr. bulstrod that what had happen must be somekind of misfortun, and instead of be abl to sai with her nativedirect, “what is it that you have in your mind?” she found herselfanxi to get awai befor she had heard anyth more explicit. shebegan to have an agit certainti that the misfortun wa somethingmor than the mere loss of monei, be keenli sensit to the factthat selina now, just as mr. hackbutt had done befor, avoidednot what she said about her husband, as thei would have avoidednot a person blemish.she said good-by with nervou hast, and told the coachman to drive tomr. vinci’s warehous. in that short drive her dread gather so muchforc from the sens of dark, that when she enter the privatecount-hous where her brother sat at hi desk, her knee trembledand her usual florid face wa deathli pale. someth of the sameeffect wa produc in him by the sight of her: he rose from hi seatto meet her, took her by the hand, and said, with hi impulsiverash—“god help you, harriet! you know all.”that moment wa perhap wors than ani which came after. it containedthat concentr experi which in great crise of emot revealsth bia of a natur, and is prophet of the ultim act which willend an intermedi struggl. without that memori of raffl she mightstil have thought onli of monetari ruin, but now along with herbroth’s look and word there dart into her mind the idea of someguilt in her husband—then, under the work of terror came the imageof her husband expos to disgrac—and then, after an instant ofscorch shame in which she felt onli the ey of the world, with oneleap of her heart she wa at hi side in mourn but unreproachingfellowship with shame and isol. all thi went on within her in amer flash of time—while she sank into the chair, and rais her eyesto her brother, who stood over her. “i know noth, walter. what isit?” she said, faintli.he told her everyth, veri inartifici, in slow fragment, makingh awar that the scandal went much beyond proof, especi as to theend of raffl.“peopl will talk,” he said. “even if a man ha been acquit by ajuri, thei’ll talk, and nod and wink—and as far as the world goe, aman might often as well be guilti as not. it’s a breakdown blow, and itdamag lydgat as much as bulstrod. i don’t pretend to sai what isth truth. i onli wish we had never heard the name of either bulstrodeor lydgat. you’d better have been a vinci all your life, and so hadrosamond.” mr. bulstrod made no repli.“but you must bear up as well as you can, harriet. peopl don’t blame_you_. and i’ll stand by you whatev you make up your mind to do,”said the brother, with rough but well-mean affection.“give me your arm to the carriag, walter,” said mr. bulstrod. “ifeel veri weak.”and when she got home she wa oblig to sai to her daughter, “i am notwel, my dear; i must go and lie down. attend to your papa. leav me inquiet. i shall take no dinner.”she lock herself in her room. she need time to get us to hermaim conscious, her poor lop life, befor she could walksteadili to the place allot her. a new search light had fallen onher husband’s charact, and she could not judg him lenient: thetwenti year in which she had believ in him and vener him byvirtu of hi conceal came back with particular that made themseem an odiou deceit. he had marri her with that bad past lifehidden behind him, and she had no faith left to protest hi innocenceof the worst that wa imput to him. her honest ostentati naturemad the share of a merit dishonor as bitter as it could be to anymort.but thi imperfectli taught woman, whose phrase and habit were an oddpatchwork, had a loyal spirit within her. the man whose prosper shehad share through nearli half a life, and who had unvaryinglycherish her—now that punish had befallen him it wa not possibleto her in ani sens to forsak him. there is a forsak which stillsit at the same board and li on the same couch with the forsakensoul, wither it the more by unlov proxim. she knew, when shelock her door, that she should unlock it readi to go down to herunhappi husband and espous hi sorrow, and sai of hi guilt, i willmourn and not reproach. but she need time to gather up her strength;she need to sob out her farewel to all the glad and pride of herlif. when she had resolv to go down, she prepar herself by somelittl act which might seem mere folli to a hard onlook; thei wereh wai of express to all spectat visibl or invis that shehad begun a new life in which she embrac humili. she took offal her ornament and put on a plain black gown, and instead of wearingh much-adorn cap and larg bow of hair, she brush her hair downand put on a plain bonnet-cap, which made her look suddenli like anearli methodist.bulstrod, who knew that hi wife had been out and had come in sayingthat she wa not well, had spent the time in an agit equal toher. he had look forward to her learn the truth from other, andhad acquiesc in that probabl, as someth easier to him than anyconfess. but now that he imagin the moment of her knowledg come,he await the result in anguish. hi daughter had been oblig tocons to leav him, and though he had allow some food to be broughtto him, he had not touch it. he felt himself perish slowli inunp miseri. perhap he should never see hi wife’s face withaffect in it again. and if he turn to god there seem to be noanswer but the pressur of retribut.it wa eight o’clock in the even befor the door open and hi wifeent. he dare not look up at her. he sat with hi ey bent down,and as she went toward him she thought he look smaller—he seem sowith and shrunken. a movement of new compass and old tendernessw through her like a great wave, and put on hand on hi whichrest on the arm of the chair, and the other on hi shoulder, shesaid, solemnli but kindli—“look up, nichola.”he rais hi ey with a littl start and look at her half amazedfor a moment: her pale face, her chang, mourn dress, the tremblingabout her mouth, all said, “i know;” and her hand and ey restedg on him. he burst out cry and thei cri togeth, she sittingat hi side. thei could not yet speak to each other of the shame whichsh wa bear with him, or of the act which had brought it down onthem. hi confess wa silent, and her promis of faith wassil. open-mind as she wa, she nevertheless shrank from the wordswhich would have express their mutual conscious, as she wouldhav shrunk from flake of fire. she could not sai, “how much is onlysland and fals suspicion?” and he did not sai, “i am innoc.”chapter lxxv.“le sentiment de la fausseté de plaisir présent, et l’ignor dela vanité de plaisir absent causent l’inconst.”—pascal.rosamond had a gleam of return cheer when the hous wa freedfrom the threaten figur, and when all the disagre creditorswer paid. but she wa not joyou: her marri life had fulfil noneof her hope, and had been quit spoil for her imagin. in thisbrief interv of calm, lydgat, rememb that he had often beenstormi in hi hour of perturb, and mind of the pain rosamondhad had to bear, wa carefulli gentl toward her; but he, too, hadlost some of hi old spirit, and he still felt it necessari to refer toan econom chang in their wai of live as a matter of cours,try to reconcil her to it gradual, and repress hi anger whensh answer by wish that he would go to live in london. when shedid not make thi answer, she listen languidli, and wonder what shehad that wa worth live for. the hard and contemptu word whichhad fallen from her husband in hi anger had deepli offend thatvan which he had at first call into activ enjoy; and what sheregard as hi pervers wai of look at thing, kept up a secretrepuls, which made her receiv all hi tender as a poorsubstitut for the happi he had fail to give her. thei were at adisadvantag with their neighbor, and there wa no longer ani outlooktoward quallingham—there wa no outlook anywher except in anoccasion letter from will ladislaw. she had felt stung anddisappoint by will’s resolut to quit middlemarch, for in spite ofwhat she knew and guess about hi admir for dorothea, shesecretli cherish the belief that he had, or would necessarili come tohav, much more admir for herself; rosamond be on of thosewomen who live much in the idea that each man thei meet would havepref them if the prefer had not been hopeless. mr. casaubonwa all veri well; but will’s interest in her date befor he knew mr.lydgat. rosamond took hi wai of talk to herself, which wa amixtur of play fault-find and hyperbol gallantri, as thedisguis of a deeper feel; and in hi presenc she felt thatagre titil of vaniti and sens of romant drama whichlydg’s presenc had no longer the magic to creat. she evenf—what will not men and women fanci in these matter?—that willexagger hi admir for mr. casaubon in order to piqu herself.in thi wai poor rosamond’s brain had been busi befor will’sdepartur. he would have made, she thought, a much more suitablehusband for her than she had found in lydgat. no notion could havebeen falser than thi, for rosamond’s discont in her marriag wasdu to the condit of marriag itself, to it demand forself-suppress and toler, and not to the natur of her husband;but the easi concept of an unreal better had a sentiment charmwhich divert her ennui. she construct a littl romanc which wa tovari the flat of her life: will ladislaw wa alwai to be abachelor and live near her, alwai to be at her command, and have anunderstood though never fulli express passion for her, which would besend out lambent flame everi now and then in interest scene.hi departur had been a proportion disappoint, and had sadlyincreas her weari of middlemarch; but at first she had thealtern dream of pleasur in store from her intercours with thefamili at quallingham. sinc then the troubl of her marri life haddeepen, and the absenc of other relief encourag her regretfulrumin over that thin romanc which she had onc fed on. men andwomen make sad mistak about their own symptom, take their vagueuneasi long, sometim for geniu, sometim for religion, andoften still for a mighti love. will ladislaw had written chattylett, half to her and half to lydgat, and she had repli: theirsepar, she felt, wa not like to be final, and the chang shenow most long for wa that lydgat should go to live in london;everyth would be agreeabl in london; and she had set to work withquiet determin to win thi result, when there came a sudden,delight promis which inspirit her.it came shortli befor the memor meet at the town-hall, and wasnoth less than a letter from will ladislaw to lydgat, which turnedinde chiefli on hi new interest in plan of colon, butment incident, that he might find it necessari to pai a visitto middlemarch within the next few week—a veri pleasant necess, hesaid, almost as good as holidai to a schoolboi. he hope there wa hisold place on the rug, and a great deal of music in store for him. buth wa quit uncertain as to the time. while lydgat wa read thelett to rosamond, her face look like a reviv flower—it grewpretti and more bloom. there wa noth unendur now: thedebt were paid, mr. ladislaw wa come, and lydgat would bepersuad to leav middlemarch and settl in london, which wa “sodiffer from a provinci town.”that wa a bright bit of morn. but soon the sky becam black overpoor rosamond. the presenc of a new gloom in her husband, about whichh wa entir reserv toward her—for he dread to expos hislacer feel to her neutral and misconcept—soon receiv apainfulli strang explan, alien to all her previou notion ofwhat could affect her happi. in the new gayeti of her spirit,think that lydgat had mere a wors fit of moodi than usual,caus him to leav her remark unansw, and evid to keep outof her wai as much as possibl, she chose, a few dai after themeet, and without speak to him on the subject, to send out notesof invit for a small even parti, feel convinc that thiswa a judici step, sinc peopl seem to have been keep alooffrom them, and want restor to the old habit of intercours. whenth invit had been accept, she would tell lydgat, and give hima wise admonit as to how a medic man should behav to hisneighbor; for rosamond had the gravest littl air possibl aboutoth peopl’s duti. but all the invit were declin, and thelast answer came into lydgat’s hand.“thi is chich’s scratch. what is he write to you about?” saidlydg, wonderingli, as he hand the note to her. she wa oblig tolet him see it, and, look at her sever, he said—“why on earth have you been send out invit without tell me,rosamond? i beg, i insist that you will not invit ani on to thishous. i suppos you have been invit other, and thei have refusedtoo.” she said noth.“do you hear me?” thunder lydgat.“ye, certainli i hear you,” said rosamond, turn her head asid withth movement of a grace long-neck bird.lydgat toss hi head without ani grace and walk out of the room,feel himself danger. rosamond’s thought wa, that he wa gettingmor and more unbear—not that there wa ani new special reason forthi peremptori. hi indisposit to tell her anyth in which hewa sure beforehand that she would not be interest wa grow intoan unreflect habit, and she wa in ignor of everyth connectedwith the thousand pound except that the loan had come from her unclebulstrod. lydgat’s odiou humor and their neighbor’ apparentavoid of them had an unaccount date for her in their relieffrom monei difficulti. if the invit had been accept she wouldhav gone to invit her mamma and the rest, whom she had seen nothingof for sever dai; and she now put on her bonnet to go and inquirewhat had becom of them all, suddenli feel as if there were aconspiraci to leav her in isol with a husband dispos to offendeverybodi. it wa after the dinner hour, and she found her father andmoth seat togeth alon in the draw-room. thei greet her withsad look, sai “well, my dear!” and no more. she had never seen herfath look so downcast; and seat herself near him she said—“is there anyth the matter, papa?”he did not answer, but mr. vinci said, “oh, my dear, have you heardnoth? it won’t be long befor it reach you.”“is it anyth about tertiu?” said rosamond, turn pale. the ideaof troubl immedi connect itself with what had beenunaccount to her in him.“oh, my dear, ye. to think of your marri into thi troubl. debtwa bad enough, but thi will be wors.”“stai, stai, luci,” said mr. vinci. “have you heard noth about youruncl bulstrod, rosamond?”“no, papa,” said the poor thing, feel as if troubl were notanyth she had befor experienc, but some invis power with aniron grasp that made her soul faint within her.her father told her everyth, sai at the end, “it’s better for youto know, my dear. i think lydgat must leav the town. thing have goneagainst him. i dare sai he couldn’t help it. i don’t accus him of anyharm,” said mr. vinci. he had alwai befor been dispos to find theutmost fault with lydgat.the shock to rosamond wa terribl. it seem to her that no lot couldb so cruelli hard as her to have marri a man who had becom thecentr of infam suspicion. in mani case it is inevit that thesham is felt to be the worst part of crime; and it would have requireda great deal of disentangl reflect, such as had never enteredinto rosamond’s life, for her in these moment to feel that her troublewa less than if her husband had been certainli known to have donesometh crimin. all the shame seem to be there. and she hadinnoc marri thi man with the belief that he and hi famili werea glori to her! she show her usual retic to her parent, and onlysaid, that if lydgat had done as she wish he would have leftmiddlemarch long ago.“she bear it beyond anyth,” said her mother when she wa gone.“ah, thank god!” said mr. vinci, who wa much broken down.but rosamond went home with a sens of justifi repugn toward herhusband. what had he realli done—how had he realli act? she did notknow. why had he not told her everyth? he did not speak to her onth subject, and of cours she could not speak to him. it came into hermind onc that she would ask her father to let her go home again; butdwel on that prospect made it seem utter dreari to her: amarri woman gone back to live with her parent—life seem to have nomean for her in such a posit: she could not contempl herselfin it.the next two dai lydgat observ a chang in her, and believ thatsh had heard the bad new. would she speak to him about it, or wouldsh go on forev in the silenc which seem to impli that shebeliev him guilti? we must rememb that he wa in a morbid state ofmind, in which almost all contact wa pain. certainli rosamond in thiscas had equal reason to complain of reserv and want of confid onhi part; but in the bitter of hi soul he excus himself;—wa henot justifi in shrink from the task of tell her, sinc now sheknew the truth she had no impuls to speak to him? but a deeper-lyingconsci that he wa in fault made him restless, and the silencebetween them becam intoler to him; it wa as if thei were bothadrift on on piec of wreck and look awai from each other.he thought, “i am a fool. haven’t i given up expect anyth? i havemarri care, not help.” and that even he said—“rosamond, have you heard anyth that distress you?”“ye,” she answer, lai down her work, which she had been carryingon with a languid semi-conscious, most unlik her usual self.“what have you heard?”“everyth, i suppos. papa told me.”“that peopl think me disgrac?”“ye,” said rosamond, faintli, begin to sew again automat.there wa silenc. lydgat thought, “if she ha ani trust in me—anynot of what i am, she ought to speak now and sai that she doe notbeliev i have deserv disgrac.”but rosamond on her side went on move her finger languidli. whateverwa to be said on the subject she expect to come from tertiu. whatdid she know? and if he were innoc of ani wrong, why did he not dosometh to clear himself?thi silenc of her brought a new rush of gall to that bitter mood inwhich lydgat had been sai to himself that nobodi believ inhim—even farebroth had not come forward. he had begun to question herwith the intent that their convers should dispers the chill fogwhich had gather between them, but he felt hi resolut check bydespair resent. even thi troubl, like the rest, she seem toregard as if it were her alon. he wa alwai to her a be apart,do what she object to. he start from hi chair with an angryimpuls, and thrust hi hand in hi pocket, walk up and down theroom. there wa an underli conscious all the while that heshould have to master thi anger, and tell her everyth, and convinceh of the fact. for he had almost learn the lesson that he mustbend himself to her natur, and that becaus she came short in hersympathi, he must give the more. soon he recur to hi intent ofopen himself: the occas must not be lost. if he could bring herto feel with some solemn that here wa a slander which must be metand not run awai from, and that the whole troubl had come out of hisdesper want of monei, it would be a moment for urg powerfulli onher that thei should be on in the resolv to do with as littl moneya possibl, so that thei might weather the bad time and keepthemselv independ. he would mention the definit measur which hedesir to take, and win her to a will spirit. he wa bound to trythi—and what els wa there for him to do?he did not know how long he had been walk uneasili backward andforward, but rosamond felt that it wa long, and wish that he wouldsit down. she too had begun to think thi an opportun for urg ontertiu what he ought to do. whatev might be the truth about all thismiseri, there wa on dread which assert itself.lydgat at last seat himself, not in hi usual chair, but in onenear to rosamond, lean asid in it toward her, and look at hergrav befor he reopen the sad subject. he had conquer himself sofar, and wa about to speak with a sens of solemn, as on anoccas which wa not to be repeat. he had even open hi lip,when rosamond, let her hand fall, look at him and said—“sure, tertiu—”“well?”“sure now at last you have given up the idea of stai inmiddlemarch. i cannot go on live here. let us go to london. papa, andeveri on els, sai you had better go. whatev miseri i have to putup with, it will be easier awai from here.”lydgat felt miser jar. instead of that critic outpour forwhich he had prepar himself with effort, here wa the old round to begon through again. he could not bear it. with a quick chang ofcounten he rose and went out of the room.perhap if he had been strong enough to persist in hi determin tobe the more becaus she wa less, that even might have had a betterissu. if hi energi could have born down that check, he might stillhav wrought on rosamond’s vision and will. we cannot be sure that anynatur, howev inflex or peculiar, will resist thi effect from amor massiv be than their own. thei mai be taken by storm and forth moment convert, becom part of the soul which enwrap them inth ardor of it movement. but poor lydgat had a throb pain withinhim, and hi energi had fallen short of it task.the begin of mutual understand and resolv seem as far off asev; nai, it seem block out by the sens of unsuccess effort.thei live on from dai to dai with their thought still apart, lydgatego about what work he had in a mood of despair, and rosamondfeel, with some justif, that he wa behav cruelli. it wasof no us to sai anyth to tertiu; but when will ladislaw came, shewa determin to tell him everyth. in spite of her generalretic, she need some on who would recogn her wrong.chapter lxxvi.to merci, piti, peac, and love all prai in their distress,and to these virtu of delight, return their thank.. . . . . .for merci ha a human heart, piti a human face;and love, the human form divin; and peac, the human dress.—william blake: _song of innoc_.some dai later, lydgat wa ride to lowick manor, in consequ ofa summon from dorothea. the summon had not been unexpect, sinc ithad follow a letter from mr. bulstrod, in which he state that hehad resum hi arrang for quit middlemarch, and must remindlydg of hi previou commun about the hospit, to thepurport of which he still adher. it had been hi duti, befor takingfurth step, to reopen the subject with mr. casaubon, who nowwish, as befor, to discuss the question with lydgat. “your viewsmai possibl have undergon some chang,” wrote mr. bulstrod; “but, inthat case also, it is desir that you should lai them befor her.”dorothea await hi arriv with eager interest. though, in deferenceto her masculin advis, she had refrain from what sir jame hadcal “interf in thi bulstrod busi,” the hardship oflydg’s posit wa continu in her mind, and when bulstrodeappli to her again about the hospit, she felt that the opportunitywa come to her which she had been hinder from hasten. in herluxuri home, wander under the bough of her own great tree, herthought wa go out over the lot of other, and her emot wereimprison. the idea of some activ good within her reach, “haunt herlik a passion,” and anoth’s need have onc come to her as adistinct imag, preoccupi her desir with the yearn to giverelief, and made her own eas tasteless. she wa full of confid hopeabout thi interview with lydgat, never heed what wa said of hisperson reserv; never heed that she wa a veri young woman.noth could have seem more irrelev to dorothea than insistenceon her youth and sex when she wa move to show her human fellowship.as she sat wait in the librari, she could do noth but livethrough again all the past scene which had brought lydgat into hermemori. thei all ow their signific to her marriag and itstroubl—but no; there were two occas in which the imag of lydgatehad come painfulli in connect with hi wife and some on els. thepain had been allai for dorothea, but it had left in her an awakenedconjectur as to what lydgat’s marriag might be to him, asuscept to the slightest hint about mr. lydgat. these thoughtswer like a drama to her, and made her ey bright, and gave anattitud of suspens to her whole frame, though she wa onli lookingout from the brown librari on to the turf and the bright green budswhich stood in relief against the dark evergreen.when lydgat came in, she wa almost shock at the chang in hi face,which wa strikingli percept to her who had not seen him for twomonth. it wa not the chang of emaci, but that effect which evenyoung face will veri soon show from the persist presenc ofresent and despond. her cordial look, when she put out her handto him, soften hi express, but onli with melancholi.“i have wish veri much to see you for a long while, mr. lydgat,”said dorothea when thei were seat opposit each other; “but i put offask you to come until mr. bulstrod appli to me again about thehospit. i know that the advantag of keep the manag of itsepar from that of the infirmari depend on you, or, at least, onth good which you ar encourag to hope for from have it under yourcontrol. and i am sure you will not refus to tell me exactli what youthink.”“you want to decid whether you should give a gener support to thehospit,” said lydgat. “i cannot conscienti advis you to do itin depend on ani activ of mine. i mai be oblig to leav thetown.”he spoke curtli, feel the ach of despair as to hi be abl tocarri out ani purpos that rosamond had set her mind against.“not becaus there is no on to believ in you?” said dorothea, pouringout her word in clear from a full heart. “i know the unhappymistak about you. i knew them from the first moment to be mistak.you have never done anyth vile. you would not do anythingdishonor.”it wa the first assur of belief in him that had fallen onlydg’s ear. he drew a deep breath, and said, “thank you.” he couldsai no more: it wa someth veri new and strang in hi life thatthes few word of trust from a woman should be so much to him.“i beseech you to tell me how everyth wa,” said dorothea,fearlessli. “i am sure that the truth would clear you.”lydgat start up from hi chair and went toward the window,forget where he wa. he had so often gone over in hi mind theposs of explain everyth without aggrav appearancesthat would tell, perhap unfairli, against bulstrod, and had so oftendecid against it—he had so often said to himself that hi assertionswould not chang peopl’s impress—that dorothea’s word soundedlik a temptat to do someth which in hi sober he hadpronounc to be unreason.“tell me, prai,” said dorothea, with simpl earnest; “then we canconsult togeth. it is wick to let peopl think evil of ani onefals, when it can be hinder.”lydgat turn, rememb where he wa, and saw dorothea’s facelook up at him with a sweet trust graviti. the presenc of anobl natur, gener in it wish, ardent in it chariti, changesth light for us: we begin to see thing again in their larger,quieter mass, and to believ that we too can be seen and judg inth whole of our charact. that influenc wa begin to act onlydg, who had for mani dai been see all life as on who isdrag and struggl amid the throng. he sat down again, and feltthat he wa recov hi old self in the conscious that he waswith on who believ in it.“i don’t want,” he said, “to bear hard on bulstrod, who ha lent memonei of which i wa in need—though i would rather have gone without itnow. he is hunt down and miser, and ha onli a poor thread oflif in him. but i should like to tell you everyth. it will be acomfort to me to speak where belief ha gone beforehand, and where ishal not seem to be offer assert of my own honesti. you willfeel what is fair to anoth, as you feel what is fair to me.”“do trust me,” said dorothea; “i will not repeat anyth without yourleav. but at the veri least, i could sai that you have made all thecircumst clear to me, and that i know you ar not in ani wayguilti. mr. farebroth would believ me, and my uncl, and sir jameschettam. nai, there ar person in middlemarch to whom i could go;although thei don’t know much of me, thei would believ me. thei wouldknow that i could have no other motiv than truth and justic. i wouldtak ani pain to clear you. i have veri littl to do. there is nothingbett that i can do in the world.”dorothea’s voic, as she made thi childlik pictur of what she woulddo, might have been almost taken as a proof that she could do iteffect. the search tender of her woman’s tone seem madefor a defenc against readi accus. lydgat did not stai to thinkthat she wa quixot: he gave himself up, for the first time in hislif, to the exquisit sens of lean entir on a generoussympathi, without ani check of proud reserv. and he told hereveryth, from the time when, under the pressur of hi difficulti,he unwillingli made hi first applic to bulstrod; gradual, inth relief of speak, get into a more thorough utter of whathad gone on in hi mind—enter fulli into the fact that hi treatmentof the patient wa oppos to the domin practic, into hi doubt atth last, hi ideal of medic duti, and hi uneasi conscious thatth accept of the monei had made some differ in hi privateinclin and profession behavior, though not in hi fulfil ofani publicli recogn oblig.“it ha come to my knowledg sinc,” he ad, “that hawlei sent someon to examin the housekeep at stone court, and she said that shegav the patient all the opium in the phial i left, as well as a gooddeal of brandi. but that would not have been oppos to ordinaryprescript, even of first-rate men. the suspicion against me had nohold there: thei ar ground on the knowledg that i took monei, thatbulstrod had strong motiv for wish the man to die, and that hegav me the monei as a bribe to concur in some malpractic or otheragainst the patient—that in ani case i accept a bribe to hold mytongu. thei ar just the suspicion that cling the most obstin,becaus thei lie in peopl’s inclin and can never be disprov.how my order came to be disobei is a question to which i don’t knowth answer. it is still possibl that bulstrod wa innoc of anycrimin intent—even possibl that he had noth to do with thedisobedi, and mere abstain from mention it. but all that hasnoth to do with the public belief. it is on of those case on whicha man is condemn on the ground of hi charact—it is believ thath ha commit a crime in some undefin wai, becaus he had themot for do it; and bulstrod’s charact ha envelop me,becaus i took hi monei. i am simpli blight—like a damag ear ofcorn—the busi is done and can’t be undon.”“oh, it is hard!” said dorothea. “i understand the difficulti there isin your vindic yourself. and that all thi should have come to youwho had meant to lead a higher life than the common, and to find outbett wai—i cannot bear to rest in thi as unchang. i know youmeant that. i rememb what you said to me when you first spoke to meabout the hospit. there is no sorrow i have thought more about thanthat—to love what is great, and try to reach it, and yet to fail.”“ye,” said lydgat, feel that here he had found room for the fullmean of hi grief. “i had some ambit. i meant everyth to bediffer with me. i thought i had more strength and masteri. but themost terribl obstacl ar such as nobodi can see except oneself.”“suppos,” said dorothea, medit,—“suppos we kept on thehospit accord to the present plan, and you stai here though onlywith the friendship and support of a few, the evil feel toward youwould gradual die out; there would come opportun in which peoplewould be forc to acknowledg that thei had been unjust to you,becaus thei would see that your purpos were pure. you mai still wina great fame like the loui and laennec i have heard you speak of, andw shall all be proud of you,” she end, with a smile.“that might do if i had my old trust in myself,” said lydgat,mournfulli. “noth gall me more than the notion of turn round andrun awai befor thi slander, leav it uncheck behind me.still, i can’t ask ani on to put a great deal of monei into a planwhich depend on me.”“it would be quit worth my while,” said dorothea, simpli. “onli think.i am veri uncomfort with my monei, becaus thei tell me i have toolittl for ani great scheme of the sort i like best, and yet i have toomuch. i don’t know what to do. i have seven hundr a-year of my ownfortun, and nineteen hundr a-year that mr. casaubon left me, andbetween three and four thousand of readi monei in the bank. i wish torais monei and pai it off gradual out of my incom which i don’twant, to bui land with and found a villag which should be a school ofindustri; but sir jame and my uncl have convinc me that the riskwould be too great. so you see that what i should most rejoic at wouldb to have someth good to do with my monei: i should like it to makeoth peopl’s live better to them. it make me veri uneasi—come allto me who don’t want it.”a smile broke through the gloom of lydgat’s face. the childlikegrav-ei earnest with which dorothea said all thi wasirresist—blent into an ador whole with her readi understandingof high experi. (of lower experi such as plai a great part inth world, poor mr. casaubon had a veri blur shortsightedknowledg, littl help by her imagin.) but she took the smile asencourag of her plan.“i think you see now that you spoke too scrupul,” she said, in aton of persuas. “the hospit would be on good; and make yourlif quit whole and well again would be anoth.”lydgat’s smile had di awai. “you have the good as well as themonei to do all that; if it could be done,” he said. “but—”he hesit a littl while, look vagu toward the window; andsh sat in silent expect. at last he turn toward her and saidimpetu—“why should i not tell you?—you know what sort of bond marriag is. youwil understand everyth.”dorothea felt her heart begin to beat faster. had he that sorrowtoo? but she fear to sai ani word, and he went on immedi.“it is imposs for me now to do anyth—to take ani step withoutconsid my wife’s happi. the thing that i might like to do if iwer alon, is becom imposs to me. i can’t see her miser. shemarri me without know what she wa go into, and it might havebeen better for her if she had not marri me.”“i know, i know—you could not give her pain, if you were not oblig todo it,” said dorothea, with keen memori of her own life.“and she ha set her mind against stai. she wish to go. thetroubl she ha had here have weari her,” said lydgat, break offagain, lest he should sai too much.“but when she saw the good that might come of stai—” said dorothea,remonstrantli, look at lydgat as if he had forgotten the reasonswhich had just been consid. he did not speak immedi.“she would not see it,” he said at last, curtli, feel at first thatthi statement must do without explan. “and, inde, i have lostal spirit about carri on my life here.” he paus a moment andthen, follow the impuls to let dorothea see deeper into thedifficulti of hi life, he said, “the fact is, thi troubl ha comeupon her confusedli. we have not been abl to speak to each other aboutit. i am not sure what is in her mind about it: she mai fear that ihav realli done someth base. it is my fault; i ought to be moreopen. but i have been suffer cruelli.”“mai i go and see her?” said dorothea, eagerli. “would she accept mysympathi? i would tell her that you have not been blamabl befor anyon’s judgment but your own. i would tell her that you shall be clearedin everi fair mind. i would cheer her heart. will you ask her if i maygo to see her? i did see her onc.”“i am sure you mai,” said lydgat, seiz the proposit with somehop. “she would feel honor—cheer, i think, by the proof that youat least have some respect for me. i will not speak to her about yourcom—that she mai not connect it with my wish at all. i know verywel that i ought not to have left anyth to be told her by other,but—”he broke off, and there wa a moment’s silenc. dorothea refrain fromsai what wa in her mind—how well she knew that there might beinvis barrier to speech between husband and wife. thi wa a pointon which even sympathi might make a wound. she return to the moreoutward aspect of lydgat’s posit, sai cheerfulli—“and if mr. lydgat knew that there were friend who would believ inyou and support you, she might then be glad that you should stai inyour place and recov your hope—and do what you meant to do. perhapsthen you would see that it wa right to agre with what i proposedabout your continu at the hospit. sure you would, if you stillhav faith in it as a mean of make your knowledg us?”lydgat did not answer, and she saw that he wa debat with himself.“you need not decid immedi,” she said, gentli. “a few dai henceit will be earli enough for me to send my answer to mr. bulstrod.”lydgat still wait, but at last turn to speak in hi most decisiveton.“no; i prefer that there should be no interv left for waver. i amno longer sure enough of myself—i mean of what it would be possibl form to do under the chang circumst of my life. it would bedishonor to let other engag themselv to anyth seriou independ on me. i might be oblig to go awai after all; i see littlech of anyth els. the whole thing is too problemat; i cannotcons to be the caus of your good be wast. no—let the newhospit be join with the old infirmari, and everyth go on as itmight have done if i had never come. i have kept a valuabl registersinc i have been there; i shall send it to a man who will make us ofit,” he end bitterli. “i can think of noth for a long while butget an incom.”“it hurt me veri much to hear you speak so hopelessli,” said dorothea.“it would be a happi to your friend, who believ in your futur,in your power to do great thing, if you would let them save you fromthat. think how much monei i have; it would be like take a burthenfrom me if you took some of it everi year till you got free from thisfett want of incom. why should not peopl do these thing? it isso difficult to make share at all even. thi is on wai.”“god bless you, mr. casaubon!” said lydgat, rise as if with thesam impuls that made hi word energet, and rest hi arm on theback of the great leather chair he had been sit in. “it is goodthat you should have such feel. but i am not the man who ought toallow himself to benefit by them. i have not given guarante enough. imust not at least sink into the degrad of be pension for workthat i never achiev. it is veri clear to me that i must not count onanyth els than get awai from middlemarch as soon as i canmanag it. i should not be abl for a long while, at the veri best, toget an incom here, and—and it is easier to make necessari chang in anew place. i must do as other men do, and think what will pleas theworld and bring in monei; look for a littl open in the londoncrowd, and push myself; set up in a water-place, or go to somesouthern town where there ar plenti of idl english, and get myselfpuf,—that is the sort of shell i must creep into and try to keep mysoul aliv in.”“now that is not brave,” said dorothea,—“to give up the fight.”“no, it is not brave,” said lydgat, “but if a man is afraid ofcreep paralysi?” then, in anoth tone, “yet you have made a greatdiffer in my courag by believ in me. everyth seem morebear sinc i have talk to you; and if you can clear me in a fewoth mind, especi in farebroth’s, i shall be deepli grate.the point i wish you not to mention is the fact of disobedi to myorder. that would soon get distort. after all, there is no evidencefor me but peopl’s opinion of me beforehand. you can onli repeat myown report of myself.”“mr. farebroth will believ—other will believ,” said dorothea. “ican sai of you what will make it stupid to suppos that you would bebrib to do a wicked.”“i don’t know,” said lydgat, with someth like a groan in hi voic.“i have not taken a bribe yet. but there is a pale shade of briberywhich is sometim call prosper. you will do me anoth greatkind, then, and come to see my wife?”“ye, i will. i rememb how pretti she is,” said dorothea, into whosemind everi impress about rosamond had cut deep. “i hope she willlik me.”as lydgat rode awai, he thought, “thi young creatur ha a heartlarg enough for the virgin mari. she evid think noth of herown futur, and would pledg awai half her incom at onc, as if shewant noth for herself but a chair to sit in from which she canlook down with those clear ey at the poor mortal who prai to her.she seem to have what i never saw in ani woman befor—a fountain offriendship toward men—a man can make a friend of her. casaubon musthav rais some heroic hallucin in her. i wonder if she couldhav ani other sort of passion for a man? ladislaw?—there wa certainlyan unusu feel between them. and casaubon must have had a notion ofit. well—her love might help a man more than her monei.”dorothea on her side had immedi form a plan of reliev lydgatefrom hi oblig to bulstrod, which she felt sure wa a part,though small, of the gall pressur he had to bear. she sat down atonc under the inspir of their interview, and wrote a brief note,in which she plead that she had more claim than mr. bulstrod had toth satisfact of provid the monei which had been servic tolydg—that it would be unkind in lydgat not to grant her theposit of be hi helper in thi small matter, the favor beingentir to her who had so littl that wa plainli mark out for herto do with her superflu monei. he might call her a creditor or byani other name if it did but impli that he grant her request. sheenclos a check for a thousand pound, and determin to take thelett with her the next dai when she went to see rosamond.chapter lxxvii.“and thu thy fall hath left a kind of blot,to mark the full-fraught man and best induedwith some suspicion.”—_henri v_.the next dai lydgat had to go to brass, and told rosamond that heshould be awai until the even. of late she had never gone beyond herown hous and garden, except to church, and onc to see her papa, towhom she said, “if tertiu goe awai, you will help us to move, willyou not, papa? i suppos we shall have veri littl monei. i am sure ihop some on will help us.” and mr. vinci had said, “ye, child, idon’t mind a hundr or two. i can see the end of that.” with theseexcept she had sat at home in languid melancholi and suspens,fix her mind on will ladislaw’s come as the on point of hope andinterest, and associ thi with some new urgenc on lydgat to makeimmedi arrang for leav middlemarch and go to london,till she felt assur that the come would be a potent caus of thego, without at all see how. thi wai of establish sequenc istoo common to be fairli regard as a peculiar folli in rosamond. andit is precis thi sort of sequenc which caus the greatest shockwhen it is sunder: for to see how an effect mai be produc is oftento see possibl miss and check; but to see noth except thedesir caus, and close upon it the desir effect, rid us ofdoubt and make our mind strongli intuit. that wa the processgo on in poor rosamond, while she arrang all object around herwith the same niceti as ever, onli with more slow—or sat down toth piano, mean to plai, and then desist, yet linger on themus stool with her white finger suspend on the wooden front, andlook befor her in dreami ennui. her melancholi had becom so markedthat lydgat felt a strang timid befor it, as a perpetu silentreproach, and the strong man, master by hi keen sensibilitiestoward thi fair fragil creatur whose life he seem somehow to havebruis, shrank from her look, and sometim start at her approach,fear of her and fear for her rush in onli the more forcibl after ithad been momentarili expel by exasper.but thi morn rosamond descend from her room upstair—where shesometim sat the whole dai when lydgat wa out—equip for a walk inth town. she had a letter to post—a letter address to mr. ladislawand written with charm discret, but intend to hasten hisarriv by a hint of troubl. the servant-maid, their solehous-servant now, notic her come down-stair in her walk dress,and thought “there never did anybodi look so pretti in a bonnet poorth.”meanwhil dorothea’s mind wa fill with her project of go torosamond, and with the mani thought, both of the past and the probablefutur, which gather round the idea of that visit. until yesterdaywhen lydgat had open to her a glimps of some troubl in hi marriedlif, the imag of mr. lydgat had alwai been associ for her withthat of will ladislaw. even in her most uneasi moment—even when shehad been agit by mr. cadwallad’s painfulli graphic report ofgossip—her effort, nai, her strongest impuls prompt, had beentoward the vindic of will from ani sulli surmis; and when,in her meet with him afterward, she had at first interpret hisword as a probabl allus to a feel toward mr. lydgat which hewa determin to cut himself off from indulg, she had had a quick,sad, excus vision of the charm there might be in hi constantopportun of companionship with that fair creatur, who most likelyshar hi other tast as she evid did hi delight in music. butther had follow hi part word—the few passion word in whichh had impli that she herself wa the object of whom hi love heldhim in dread, that it wa hi love for her onli which he wa resolvednot to declar but to carri awai into banish. from the time of thatpart, dorothea, believ in will’s love for her, believ with aproud delight in hi delic sens of honor and hi determin thatno on should impeach him justli, felt her heart quit at rest as toth regard he might have for mr. lydgat. she wa sure that the regardwa blameless.there ar natur in which, if thei love us, we ar consciou of havinga sort of baptism and consecr: thei bind us over to rectitud andpur by their pure belief about us; and our sin becom that worstkind of sacrileg which tear down the invis altar of trust. “ifyou ar not good, none is good”—those littl word mai give a terrificmean to respons, mai hold a vitriol intens for remors.dorothea’s natur wa of that kind: her own passion fault lai alongth easili count open channel of her ardent charact; and while shewa full of piti for the visibl mistak of other, she had not yetani materi within her experi for subtl construct andsuspicion of hidden wrong. but that simplic of her, hold up anid for other in her believ concept of them, wa on of thegreat power of her womanhood. and it had from the first act stronglyon will ladislaw. he felt, when he part from her, that the briefword by which he had tri to convei to her hi feel about herselfand the divis which her fortun made between them, would onli profitbi their breviti when dorothea had to interpret them: he felt that inher mind he had found hi highest estim.and he wa right there. in the month sinc their part dorothea hadfelt a delici though sad repos in their relat to each other, ason which wa inwardli whole and without blemish. she had an activeforc of antagon within her, when the antagon turn on thedef either of plan or person that she believ in; and the wrongswhich she felt that will had receiv from her husband, and theextern condit which to other were ground for slight him,onli gave the more tenac to her affect and admir judgment. andnow with the disclosur about bulstrod had come anoth factaffect will’s social posit, which rous afresh dorothea’s inwardresist to what wa said about him in that part of her world whichlai within park pale.“young ladislaw the grandson of a thiev jew pawnbrok” wa a phrasewhich had enter emphat into the dialogu about the bulstrodebusi, at lowick, tipton, and freshitt, and wa a wors kind ofplacard on poor will’s back than the “italian with white mice.” uprightsir jame chettam wa convinc that hi own satisfact wa righteouswhen he thought with some complac that here wa an ad leagu tothat mountain distanc between ladislaw and dorothea, which enabledhim to dismiss ani anxieti in that direct as too absurd. and perhapsther had been some pleasur in point mr. brook’s attent to thisugli bit of ladislaw’s genealog, as a fresh candl for him to see hisown folli by. dorothea had observ the animu with which will’s partin the pain stori had been recal more than onc; but she hadutt no word, be check now, as she had not been formerli inspeak of will, by the conscious of a deeper relat betweenthem which must alwai remain in consecr secreci. but her silenceshroud her resist emot into a more thorough glow; and thismisfortun in will’s lot which, it seem, other were wish to flingat hi back as an opprobrium, onli gave someth more of enthusiasm toher cling thought.she entertain no vision of their ever come into nearer union, andyet she had taken no postur of renunci. she had accept herwhol relat to will veri simpli as part of her marriag sorrow, andwould have thought it veri sin in her to keep up an inward wailbecaus she wa not complet happi, be rather dispos to dwell onth superflu of her lot. she could bear that the chief pleasuresof her tender should lie in memori, and the idea of marriag cameto her sole as a repuls proposit from some suitor of whom sheat present knew noth, but whose merit, as seen by her friend,would be a sourc of torment to her:—“somebodi who will manag yourproperti for you, my dear,” wa mr. brook’s attract suggest ofsuit characterist. “i should like to manag it myself, if i knewwhat to do with it,” said dorothea. no—she adher to her declarationthat she would never be marri again, and in the long vallei of herlif which look so flat and empti of waymark, guidanc would come assh walk along the road, and saw her fellow-passeng by the wai.thi habitu state of feel about will ladislaw had been strong inal her wake hour sinc she had propos to pai a visit to mr.lydgat, make a sort of background against which she saw rosamond’sfigur present to her without hindranc to her interest andcompass. there wa evid some mental separ, some barrier tocomplet confid which had arisen between thi wife and the husbandwho had yet made her happi a law to him. that wa a troubl whichno third person must directli touch. but dorothea thought with deeppiti of the loneli which must have come upon rosamond from thesuspicion cast on her husband; and there would sure be help in themanifest of respect for lydgat and sympathi with her.“i shall talk to her about her husband,” thought dorothea, as she wasb driven toward the town. the clear spring morn, the scent ofth moist earth, the fresh leav just show their creas-up wealthof greeneri from out their half-open sheath, seem part of thecheer she wa feel from a long convers with mr.farebroth, who had joyfulli accept the justifi explan oflydg’s conduct. “i shall take mr. lydgat good new, and perhapssh will like to talk to me and make a friend of me.”dorothea had anoth errand in lowick gate: it wa about a newfin-tone bell for the school-hous, and as she had to get out of hercarriag veri near to lydgat’s, she walk thither across the street,have told the coachman to wait for some packag. the street door wasopen, and the servant wa take the opportun of look out at thecarriag which wa paus within sight when it becam appar to herthat the ladi who “belong to it” wa come toward her.“is mr. lydgat at home?” said dorothea.“i’m not sure, my ladi; i’ll see, if you’ll pleas to walk in,” saidmartha, a littl confus on the score of her kitchen apron, butcollect enough to be sure that “mum” wa not the right titl for thisqueenli young widow with a carriag and pair. “will you pleas to walkin, and i’ll go and see.”“sai that i am mr. casaubon,” said dorothea, as martha move forwardintend to show her into the draw-room and then to go up-stair tose if rosamond had return from her walk.thei cross the broader part of the entranc-hall, and turn up thepassag which led to the garden. the draw-room door wa unlatch,and martha, push it without look into the room, wait for mr.casaubon to enter and then turn awai, the door have swung open andswung back again without nois.dorothea had less of outward vision than usual thi morn, beingfil with imag of thing as thei had been and were go to be. shefound herself on the other side of the door without see anythingremark, but immedi she heard a voic speak in low toneswhich startl her as with a sens of dream in daylight, andadvanc unconsci a step or two beyond the project slab of abookcas, she saw, in the terribl illumin of a certainti whichfil up all outlin, someth which made her paus, motionless,without self-possess enough to speak.seat with hi back toward her on a sofa which stood against the wallon a line with the door by which she had enter, she saw willladislaw: close by him and turn toward him with a flushedtear which gave a new brillianc to her face sat rosamond, herbonnet hang back, while will lean toward her clasp both heruprais hand in hi and spoke with low-tone fervor.rosamond in her agit absorpt had not notic the silentlyadvanc figur; but when dorothea, after the first immeasurableinst of thi vision, move confusedli backward and found herselfimped by some piec of furnitur, rosamond wa suddenli awar of herpres, and with a spasmod movement snatch awai her hand andros, look at dorothea who wa necessarili arrest. will ladislaw,start up, look round also, and meet dorothea’s ey with a newlightn in them, seem chang to marbl. but she immediatelyturn them awai from him to rosamond and said in a firm voic—“excus me, mr. lydgat, the servant did not know that you were here.i call to deliv an import letter for mr. lydgat, which i wishedto put into your own hand.”she laid down the letter on the small tabl which had check herretreat, and then includ rosamond and will in on distant glanc andbow, she went quickli out of the room, meet in the passag thesurpris martha, who said she wa sorri the mistress wa not at home,and then show the strang ladi out with an inward reflect thatgrand peopl were probabl more impati than other.dorothea walk across the street with her most elast step and wasquickli in her carriag again.“drive on to freshitt hall,” she said to the coachman, and ani onelook at her might have thought that though she wa paler than usualsh wa never anim by a more self-possess energi. and that wasreal her experi. it wa as if she had drunk a great draught ofscorn that stimul her beyond the suscept to other feel.she had seen someth so far below her belief, that her emotionsrush back from it and made an excit throng without an object. sheneed someth activ to turn her excit out upon. she felt powerto walk and work for a dai, without meat or drink. and she would carryout the purpos with which she had start in the morn, of go tofreshitt and tipton to tell sir jame and her uncl all that she wishedthem to know about lydgat, whose marri loneli under hi trialnow present itself to her with new signific, and made her moreard in readi to be hi champion. she had never felt anythinglik thi triumphant power of indign in the struggl of hermarri life, in which there had alwai been a quickli subdu pang;and she took it as a sign of new strength.“dodo, how veri bright your ey ar!” said celia, when sir jame wasgon out of the room. “and you don’t see anyth you look at, arthuror anyth. you ar go to do someth uncomfort, i know. is ital about mr. lydgat, or ha someth els happen?” celia had beenus to watch her sister with expect.“ye, dear, a great mani thing have happen,” said dodo, in her fullton.“i wonder what,” said celia, fold her arm cozili and leaningforward upon them.“oh, all the troubl of all peopl on the face of the earth,” saiddorothea, lift her arm to the back of her head.“dear me, dodo, ar you go to have a scheme for them?” said celia, alittl uneasi at thi hamlet-like rave.but sir jame came in again, readi to accompani dorothea to the grang,and she finish her expedit well, not swerv in her resolutionuntil she descend at her own door.chapter lxxviii.“would it were yesterdai and i i’ the grave,with her sweet faith abov for monument.”rosamond and will stood motionless—thei did not know how long—helook toward the spot where dorothea had stood, and she lookingtoward him with doubt. it seem an endless time to rosamond, in whoseinmost soul there wa hardli so much annoy as gratif fromwhat had just happen. shallow natur dream of an easi swai over theemot of other, trust implicitli in their own petti magic toturn the deepest stream, and confid, by pretti gestur andremark, of make the thing that is not as though it were. she knewthat will had receiv a sever blow, but she had been littl us toimagin other peopl’s state of mind except as a materi cut intoshap by her own wish; and she believ in her own power to sooth orsubdu. even tertiu, that most pervers of men, wa alwai subdu inth long-run: event had been obstin, but still rosamond would havesaid now, as she did befor her marriag, that she never gave up whatsh had set her mind on.she put out her arm and laid the tip of her finger on will’scoat-sleev.“don’t touch me!” he said, with an utter like the cut of a lash,dart from her, and chang from pink to white and back again, as ifhi whole frame were tingl with the pain of the sting. he wheeledround to the other side of the room and stood opposit to her, with thetip of hi finger in hi pocket and hi head thrown back, lookingfierc not at rosamond but at a point a few inch awai from her.she wa keenli offend, but the sign she made of thi were such asonli lydgat wa us to interpret. she becam suddenli quiet andseat herself, unti her hang bonnet and lai it down with hershawl. her littl hand which she fold befor her were veri cold.it would have been safer for will in the first instanc to have takenup hi hat and gone awai; but he had felt no impuls to do thi; on thecontrari, he had a horribl inclin to stai and shatter rosamondwith hi anger. it seem as imposs to bear the fatal she haddrawn down on him without vent hi furi as it would be to a pantherto bear the javelin-wound without spring and bite. and yet—howcould he tell a woman that he wa readi to curs her? he wa fumingund a repress law which he wa forc to acknowledg: he wasdanger pois, and rosamond’s voic now brought the decisivevibr. in flute-like tone of sarcasm she said—“you can easili go after mr. casaubon and explain your prefer.”“go after her!” he burst out, with a sharp edg in hi voic. “do youthink she would turn to look at me, or valu ani word i ever utter toher again at more than a dirti feather?—explain! how can a man explainat the expens of a woman?”“you can tell her what you pleas,” said rosamond with more tremor.“do you suppos she would like me better for sacrif you? she isnot a woman to be flatter becaus i made myself despic—to believethat i must be true to her becaus i wa a dastard to you.”he began to move about with the restless of a wild anim that seesprei but cannot reach it. present he burst out again—“i had no hope befor—not much—of anyth better to come. but i hadon certainti—that she believ in me. whatev peopl had said or doneabout me, she believ in me.—that’s gone! she’ll never again think meanyth but a paltri pretenc—too nice to take heaven except uponflatt condit, and yet sell myself for ani devil’s chang byth sly. she’ll think of me as an incarn insult to her, from thefirst moment we—”will stop as if he had found himself grasp someth that mustnot be thrown and shatter. he found anoth vent for hi rage bysnatch up rosamond’s word again, as if thei were reptil to bethrottl and flung off.“explain! tell a man to explain how he drop into hell! explain myprefer! i never had a _prefer_ for her, ani more than i have aprefer for breath. no other woman exist by the side of her. iwould rather touch her hand if it were dead, than i would touch anyoth woman’s live.”rosamond, while these poison weapon were be hurl at her, wasalmost lose the sens of her ident, and seem to be wake intosom new terribl exist. she had no sens of chill resoluterepuls, of retic self-justif such as she had known underlydg’s most stormi displeasur: all her sensibl wa turn intoa bewild novelti of pain; she felt a new terrifi recoil under alash never experienc befor. what anoth natur felt in oppositionto her own wa be burnt and bitten into her conscious. when willhad ceas to speak she had becom an imag of sicken miseri: herlip were pale, and her ey had a tearless dismai in them. if it hadbeen tertiu who stood opposit to her, that look of miseri would havebeen a pang to him, and he would have sunk by her side to comfort her,with that strong-arm comfort which she had often held veri cheap.let it be forgiven to will that he had no such movement of piti. he hadfelt no bond beforehand to thi woman who had spoil the idealtreasur of hi life, and he held himself blameless. he knew that hewa cruel, but he had no relent in him yet.after he had done speak, he still move about, half in absenc ofmind, and rosamond sat perfectli still. at length will, seem tobethink himself, took up hi hat, yet stood some moment irresolut. hehad spoken to her in a wai that made a phrase of common politenessdifficult to utter; and yet, now that he had come to the point of goingawai from her without further speech, he shrank from it as a brutal;he felt check and stultifi in hi anger. he walk toward themantel-piec and lean hi arm on it, and wait in silenc for—hehardli knew what. the vindict fire wa still burn in him, and hecould utter no word of retract; but it wa nevertheless in hismind that have come back to thi hearth where he had enjoi acaress friendship he had found calam seat there—he had hadsuddenli reveal to him a troubl that lai outsid the home as well aswithin it. and what seem a forebod wa press upon him as withslow pincer:—that hi life might come to be enslav by thi helplesswoman who had thrown herself upon him in the dreari sad of herheart. but he wa in gloomi rebellion against the fact that hi quickapprehens foreshadow to him, and when hi ey fell onrosamond’s blight face it seem to him that he wa the more pitiableof the two; for pain must enter into it glorifi life of memorybefor it can turn into compass.and so thei remain for mani minut, opposit each other, far apart,in silenc; will’s face still possess by a mute rage, and rosamond’sby a mute miseri. the poor thing had no forc to fling out ani passionin return; the terribl collaps of the illus toward which all herhop had been strain wa a stroke which had too thoroughli shakenh: her littl world wa in ruin, and she felt herself totter inth midst as a lone bewild conscious.will wish that she would speak and bring some mitig shadowacross hi own cruel speech, which seem to stand stare at them bothin mockeri of ani attempt at reviv fellowship. but she said noth,and at last with a desper effort over himself, he ask, “shall icom in and see lydgat thi even?”“if you like,” rosamond answer, just audibl.and then will went out of the hous, martha never know that he hadbeen in.after he wa gone, rosamond tri to get up from her seat, but fellback faint. when she came to herself again, she felt too ill to maketh exert of rise to ring the bell, and she remain helplessuntil the girl, surpris at her long absenc, thought for the firsttim of look for her in all the down-stair room. rosamond saidthat she had felt suddenli sick and faint, and want to be helpedup-stair. when there she threw herself on the bed with her cloth on,and lai in appar torpor, as she had done onc befor on a memorabledai of grief.lydgat came home earlier than he had expect, about half-past five,and found her there. the percept that she wa ill threw everi otherthought into the background. when he felt her puls, her ey rest onhim with more persist than thei had done for a long while, as ifsh felt some content that he wa there. he perceiv the differ ina moment, and seat himself by her put hi arm gentli under her, andbend over her said, “my poor rosamond! ha someth agit you?”cling to him she fell into hyster sob and cri, and forth next hour he did noth but sooth and tend her. he imagin thatdorothea had been to see her, and that all thi effect on her nervoussystem, which evid involv some new turn toward himself, wasdu to the excit of the new impress which that visit hadrais.chapter lxxix.“now, i saw in my dream, that just as thei had end their talk, theydrew nigh to a veri miri slough, that wa in the midst of the plain;and thei, be heedless, did both fall suddenli into the bog. the nameof the slough wa despond.”—bunyan.when rosamond wa quiet, and lydgat had left her, hope that shemight soon sleep under the effect of an anodyn, he went into thedraw-room to fetch a book which he had left there, mean to spendth even in hi work-room, and he saw on the tabl dorothea’s letteraddress to him. he had not ventur to ask rosamond if mr. casaubonhad call, but the read of thi letter assur him of the fact, fordorothea mention that it wa to be carri by herself.when will ladislaw came in a littl later lydgat met him with asurpris which made it clear that he had not been told of the earliervisit, and will could not sai, “did not mr. lydgat tell you that icam thi morn?”“poor rosamond is ill,” lydgat ad immedi on hi greet.“not serious, i hope,” said will.“no—onli a slight nervou shock—the effect of some agit. she hasbeen overwrought late. the truth is, ladislaw, i am an unlucki devil.we have gone through sever round of purgatori sinc you left, and ihav late got on to a wors ledg of it than ever. i suppos you areonli just come down—you look rather batter—you have not been longenough in the town to hear anyth?”“i travel all night and got to the white hart at eight o’clock thismorn. i have been shut myself up and rest,” said will,feel himself a sneak, but see no altern to thi evas.and then he heard lydgat’s account of the troubl which rosamond hadalreadi depict to him in her wai. she had not mention the fact ofwil’s name be connect with the public stori—thi detail notimmedi affect her—and he now heard it for the first time.“i thought it better to tell you that your name is mix up with thedisclosur,” said lydgat, who could understand better than most menhow ladislaw might be stung by the revel. “you will be sure tohear it as soon as you turn out into the town. i suppos it is truethat raffl spoke to you.”“ye,” said will, sardon. “i shall be fortun if gossip doesnot make me the most disreput person in the whole affair. i shouldthink the latest version must be, that i plot with raffl to murderbulstrod, and ran awai from middlemarch for the purpos.”he wa think “here is a new ring in the sound of my name torecommend it in her hear; howev—what doe it signifi now?”but he said noth of bulstrod’s offer to him. will wa veri open andcareless about hi person affair, but it wa among the moreexquisit touch in natur’s model of him that he had a delicategeneros which warn him into retic here. he shrank from sayingthat he had reject bulstrod’s monei, in the moment when he waslearn that it wa lydgat’s misfortun to have accept it.lydgat too wa retic in the midst of hi confid. he made noallus to rosamond’s feel under their troubl, and of dorothea heonli said, “mr. casaubon ha been the on person to come forward andsai that she had no belief in ani of the suspicion against me.”observ a chang in will’s face, he avoid ani further mention ofher, feel himself too ignor of their relat to each other notto fear that hi word might have some hidden pain bear on it.and it occur to him that dorothea wa the real caus of the presentvisit to middlemarch.the two men were piti each other, but it wa onli will who guessedth extent of hi companion’s troubl. when lydgat spoke withdesper resign of go to settl in london, and said with afaint smile, “we shall have you again, old fellow,” will feltinexpress mourn, and said noth. rosamond had that morningentr him to urg thi step on lydgat; and it seem to him as ifh were behold in a magic panorama a futur where he himself wasslid into that pleasureless yield to the small solicit ofcircumst, which is a common histori of perdit than ani singlemoment bargain.we ar on a peril margin when we begin to look passiv at ourfutur selv, and see our own figur led with dull consent intoinsipid misdo and shabbi achiev. poor lydgat wa inwardlygroan on that margin, and will wa arriv at it. it seem to himthi even as if the cruelti of hi outburst to rosamond had made anoblig for him, and he dread the oblig: he dread lydgat’sunsuspect good-will: he dread hi own distast for hi spoiledlif, which would leav him in motiveless leviti.chapter lxxx.stern lawgiv! yet thou dost wearth godhead’s most benign grace;nor know we anyth so faira is the smile upon thy face;flower laugh befor thee on their bed,and fragranc in thy foot tread;thou dost preserv the star from wrong;and the most ancient heaven, through thee, ar fresh and strong.—wordsworth: _od to duti_.when dorothea had seen mr. farebroth in the morn, she had promisedto go and dine at the parsonag on her return from freshitt. there wasa frequent interchang of visit between her and the farebrotherfamili, which enabl her to sai that she wa not at all lone at themanor, and to resist for the present the sever prescript of a ladycompanion. when she reach home and rememb her engag, she wasglad of it; and find that she had still an hour befor she coulddress for dinner, she walk straight to the schoolhous and enteredinto a convers with the master and mistress about the new bell,give eager attent to their small detail and repetit, andget up a dramat sens that her life wa veri busi. she paus onher wai back to talk to old master bunnei who wa put in somegarden-seed, and discours wise with that rural sage about thecrop that would make the most return on a perch of ground, and theresult of sixti year’ experi as to soil—name, that if your soilwa pretti mellow it would do, but if there came wet, wet, wet to makeit all of a mummi, why then—find that the social spirit had beguil her into be rather late,she dress hastili and went over to the parsonag rather earlier thanwa necessari. that hous wa never dull, mr. farebroth, like anotherwhit of selborn, have continu someth new to tell of hisinarticul guest and _proteg_, whom he wa teach the boi notto torment; and he had just set up a pair of beauti goat to be petsof the villag in gener, and to walk at larg as sacr anim. theeven went by cheerfulli till after tea, dorothea talk more thanusu and dilat with mr. farebroth on the possibl histori ofcreatur that convers compendi with their antenna, and foraught we know mai hold reform parliament; when suddenli someinarticul littl sound were heard which call everybodi’sattent.“henrietta nobl,” said mr. farebroth, see her small sistermov about the furnitur-leg distressfulli, “what is the matter?”“i have lost my tortois-shell lozeng-box. i fear the kitten hasrol it awai,” said the tini old ladi, involuntarili continu herbeav-like note.“is it a great treasur, aunt?” said mr. farebroth, put up hisglass and look at the carpet.“mr. ladislaw gave it me,” said miss nobl. “a german box—veri pretti,but if it fall it alwai spin awai as far as it can.”“oh, if it is ladislaw’s present,” said mr. farebroth, in a deep toneof comprehens, get up and hunt. the box wa found at lastund a chiffoni, and miss nobl grasp it with delight, sai, “itwa under a fender the last time.”“that is an affair of the heart with my aunt,” said mr. farebroth,smile at dorothea, as he reseat himself.“if henrietta nobl form an attach to ani on, mr. casaubon,”said hi mother, emphat,—“she is like a dog—she would take theirsho for a pillow and sleep the better.”“mr. ladislaw’s shoe, i would,” said henrietta nobl.dorothea made an attempt at smile in return. she wa surpris andannoi to find that her heart wa palpit violent, and that itwa quit useless to try after a recoveri of her former anim.alarm at herself—fear some further betray of a chang so markedin it occas, she rose and said in a low voic with undisguisedanxieti, “i must go; i have overtir myself.”mr. farebroth, quick in percept, rose and said, “it is true; youmust have half-exhaust yourself in talk about lydgat. that sortof work tell upon on after the excit is over.”he gave her hi arm back to the manor, but dorothea did not attempt tospeak, even when he said good-night.the limit of resist wa reach, and she had sunk back helplesswithin the clutch of inescap anguish. dismiss tantripp with afew faint word, she lock her door, and turn awai from it towardsth vacant room she press her hand hard on the top of her head, andmoan out—“oh, i did love him!”then came the hour in which the wave of suffer shook her toothoroughli to leav ani power of thought. she could onli cry in loudwhisp, between her sob, after her lost belief which she had plantedand kept aliv from a veri littl seed sinc the dai in rome—after herlost joi of cling with silent love and faith to on who, misprizedbi other, wa worthi in her thought—after her lost woman’s pride ofreign in hi memori—after her sweet dim perspect of hope, thatalong some pathwai thei should meet with unchang recognit and takeup the backward year as a yesterdai.in that hour she repeat what the merci ey of solitud havelook on for ag in the spiritu struggl of man—she besoughthard and cold and ach weari to bring her relief from themysteri incorpor might of her anguish: she lai on the bare floorand let the night grow cold around her; while her grand woman’s framewa shaken by sob as if she had been a despair child.there were two imag—two live form that tore her heart in two, asif it had been the heart of a mother who seem to see her child dividedbi the sword, and press on bleed half to her breast while hergaz goe forth in agoni toward the half which is carri awai by theli woman that ha never known the mother’s pang.here, with the near of an answer smile, here within thevibr bond of mutual speech, wa the bright creatur whom she hadtrust—who had come to her like the spirit of morn visit the dimvault where she sat as the bride of a worn-out life; and now, with aful conscious which had never awaken befor, she stretch outher arm toward him and cri with bitter cri that their nearnesswa a part vision: she discov her passion to herself in theunshrink utter of despair.and there, aloof, yet persist with her, move wherev she move,wa the will ladislaw who wa a chang belief exhaust of hope, adetect illus—no, a live man toward whom there could not yetstruggl ani wail of regret piti, from the midst of scorn andindign and jealou offend pride. the fire of dorothea’s angerwa not easili spent, and it flame out in fit return of spurningreproach. why had he come obtrud hi life into her, her that mighthav been whole enough without him? why had he brought hi cheap regardand hi lip-born word to her who had noth paltri to give inexchang? he knew that he wa delud her—wish, in the veri momentof farewel, to make her believ that he gave her the whole price ofher heart, and knew that he had spent it half befor. why had he notstai among the crowd of whom she ask noth—but onli prai thatthei might be less contempt?but she lost energi at last even for her loud-whisper cri andmoan: she subsid into helpless sob, and on the cold floor shesob herself to sleep.in the chill hour of the morn twilight, when all wa dim aroundh, she awok—not with ani amaz wonder where she wa or what hadhappen, but with the clearest conscious that she wa look intoth ey of sorrow. she rose, and wrap warm thing around her, andseat herself in a great chair where she had often watch befor. shewa vigor enough to have born that hard night without feel illin bodi, beyond some ach and fatigu; but she had wake to a newcondit: she felt as if her soul had been liber from it terribleconflict; she wa no longer wrestl with her grief, but could sitdown with it as a last companion and make it a sharer in herthought. for now the thought came thickli. it wa not in dorothea’snatur, for longer than the durat of a paroxysm, to sit in thenarrow cell of her calam, in the besot miseri of a consciousnessthat onli see anoth’s lot as an accid of it own.she began now to live through that yesterdai morn deliberatelyagain, forc herself to dwell on everi detail and it possiblemean. wa she alon in that scene? wa it her event onli? she forcedherself to think of it as bound up with anoth woman’s life—a womantoward whom she had set out with a long to carri some clear andcomfort into her becloud youth. in her first outleap of jealousindign and disgust, when quit the hate room, she had flungawai all the merci with which she had undertaken that visit. she hadenvelop both will and rosamond in her burn scorn, and it seem toher as if rosamond were burn out of her sight forev. but that baseprompt which make a women more cruel to a rival than to a faithlesslov, could have no strength of recurr in dorothea when thedomin spirit of justic within her had onc overcom the tumult andhad onc shown her the truer measur of thing. all the activ thoughtwith which she had befor been repres to herself the trial oflydg’s lot, and thi young marriag union which, like her own,seem to have it hidden as well as evid troubl—all thi vividsympathet experi return to her now as a power: it asserteditself as acquir knowledg assert itself and will not let us see asw saw in the dai of our ignor. she said to her own irremediablegrief, that it should make her more help, instead of drive herback from effort.and what sort of crisi might not thi be in three live whose contactwith her laid an oblig on her as if thei had been suppliantsbear the sacr branch? the object of her rescu were not to besought out by her fanci: thei were chosen for her. she yearn towardsth perfect right, that it might make a throne within her, and rule hererr will. “what should i do—how should i act now, thi veri dai, ifi could clutch my own pain, and compel it to silenc, and think ofthos three?”it had taken long for her to come to that question, and there wa lightpierc into the room. she open her curtain, and look out towardsth bit of road that lai in view, with field beyond outsid theentranc-gate. on the road there wa a man with a bundl on hi backand a woman carri her babi; in the field she could see figuresmov—perhap the shepherd with hi dog. far off in the bend skywa the pearli light; and she felt the larg of the world and themanifold wake of men to labor and endur. she wa a part of thatinvoluntari, palpit life, and could neither look out on it fromher luxuri shelter as a mere spectat, nor hide her ey in selfishcomplain.what she would resolv to do that dai did not yet seem quit clear, butsometh that she could achiev stir her as with an approachingmurmur which would soon gather distinct. she took off the clotheswhich seem to have some of the weari of a hard watch in them,and began to make her toilet. present she rang for tantripp, who camein her dress-gown.“why, madam, you’ve never been in bed thi bless night,” burst outtantripp, look first at the bed and then at dorothea’s face, whichin spite of bath had the pale cheek and pink eyelid of a materdolorosa. “you’ll kill yourself, you _will_. anybodi might think nowyou had a right to give yourself a littl comfort.”“don’t be alarm, tantripp,” said dorothea, smile. “i have slept; iam not ill. i shall be glad of a cup of coffe as soon as possibl. andi want you to bring me my new dress; and most like i shall want mynew bonnet to-dai.”“thei’ve lain there a month and more readi for you, madam, and mostthank i shall be to see you with a coupl o’ pound’ worth less ofcrap,” said tantripp, stoop to light the fire. “there’s a reason inmourn, as i’ve alwai said; and three fold at the bottom of yourskirt and a plain quill in your bonnet—and if ever anybodi lookedlik an angel, it’s you in a net quill—is what’s consist for asecond year. at least, that’s _my_ think,” end tantripp, lookinganxi at the fire; “and if anybodi wa to marri me flatteringhimself i should wear those hijeou weeper two year for him, he’d bedeceiv by hi own vaniti, that’s all.”“the fire will do, my good tan,” said dorothea, speak as she us todo in the old lausann dai, onli with a veri low voic; “get me thecoffe.”she fold herself in the larg chair, and lean her head against itin fatigu quiescenc, while tantripp went awai wonder at thisstrang contrari in her young mistress—that just the morn whensh had more of a widow’s face than ever, she should have ask for herlight mourn which she had waiv befor. tantripp would never havefound the clew to thi mysteri. dorothea wish to acknowledg that shehad not the less an activ life befor her becaus she had buri apriv joi; and the tradit that fresh garment belong to alliniti, haunt her mind, made her grasp after even that slightoutward help toward calm resolv. for the resolv wa not easi.nevertheless at eleven o’clock she wa walk toward middlemarch,have made up her mind that she would make as quietli and unnoticeablya possibl her second attempt to see and save rosamond.chapter lxxxi.du erd warst auch dies nacht beständig,und athmest neu erquickt zu meinen füssen,beginnest schon mit lust mich zu umgeben,du regst und rührst ein kräftige beschliessen_zum höchsten dasein immerfort zu streben_.—_faust:_ 2r theil.when dorothea wa again at lydgat’s door speak to martha, he wa inth room close by with the door ajar, prepar to go out. he heard hervoic, and immedi came to her.“do you think that mr. lydgat can receiv me thi morn?” she said,have reflect that it would be better to leav out all allus toher previou visit.“i have no doubt she will,” said lydgat, suppress hi thought aboutdorothea’s look, which were as much chang as rosamond’s, “if youwil be kind enough to come in and let me tell her that you ar here.she ha not been veri well sinc you were here yesterdai, but she isbett thi morn, and i think it is veri like that she will becheer by see you again.”it wa plain that lydgat, as dorothea had expect, knew noth aboutth circumst of her yesterdai’s visit; nai, he appear to imaginethat she had carri it out accord to her intent. she hadprepar a littl note ask rosamond to see her, which she would havegiven to the servant if he had not been in the wai, but now she wa inmuch anxieti as to the result of hi announc.after lead her into the draw-room, he paus to take a letterfrom hi pocket and put it into her hand, sai, “i wrote thi lastnight, and wa go to carri it to lowick in my ride. when on isgrat for someth too good for common thank, write is lessunsatisfactori than speech—on doe not at least _hear_ how inadequateth word ar.”dorothea’s face brighten. “it is i who have most to thank for, sincey have let me take that place. you _have_ consent?” she said,suddenli doubt.“ye, the check is go to bulstrod to-dai.”he said no more, but went up-stair to rosamond, who had but latelyfinish dress herself, and sat languidli wonder what she shoulddo next, her habitu industri in small thing, even in the dai of hersad, prompt her to begin some kind of occup, which shedrag through slowli or paus in from lack of interest. she lookedil, but had recov her usual quietud of manner, and lydgat hadfear to disturb her by ani question. he had told her of dorothea’sletter contain the check, and afterward he had said, “ladislaw iscom, rosi; he sat with me last night; i dare sai he will be here againto-dai. i thought he look rather batter and depress.” androsamond had made no repli.now, when he came up, he said to her veri gentli, “rosi, dear, mr.casaubon is come to see you again; you would like to see her, would younot?” that she color and gave rather a startl movement did notsurpris him after the agit produc by the interview yesterdai—abenefic agit, he thought, sinc it seem to have made her turnto him again.rosamond dare not sai no. she dare not with a tone of her voic touchth fact of yesterdai. why had mr. casaubon come again? the answerwa a blank which rosamond could onli fill up with dread, for willladislaw’s lacer word had made everi thought of dorothea a freshsmart to her. nevertheless, in her new humili uncertainti shedar do noth but compli. she did not sai ye, but she rose and letlydg put a light shawl over her shoulder, while he said, “i amgo out immedi.” then someth cross her mind which promptedh to sai, “prai tell martha not to bring ani on els into thedraw-room.” and lydgat assent, think that he fulli understoodthi wish. he led her down to the draw-room door, and then turnedawai, observ to himself that he wa rather a blunder husband tobe depend for hi wife’s trust in him on the influenc of anotherwoman.rosamond, wrap her soft shawl around her as she walk towardsdorothea, wa inwardli wrap her soul in cold reserv. had mr.casaubon come to sai anyth to her about will? if so, it wa aliberti that rosamond resent; and she prepar herself to meet everyword with polit impass. will had bruis her pride too sorelyfor her to feel ani compunct toward him and dorothea: her owninjuri seem much the greater. dorothea wa not onli the “prefer”woman, but had also a formid advantag in be lydgat’sbenefactor; and to poor rosamond’s pain confus vision it seemedthat thi mr. casaubon—thi woman who predomin in all thingsconcern her—must have come now with the sens of have theadvantag, and with animos prompt her to us it. inde, notrosamond onli, but ani on els, know the outer fact of the case,and not the simpl inspir on which dorothea act, might well havewond why she came.look like the love ghost of herself, her grace slim wrappedin her soft white shawl, the round infantin mouth and cheekinevit suggest mild and innoc, rosamond paus at threeyard’ distanc from her visitor and bow. but dorothea, who had takenoff her glove, from an impuls which she could never resist when shewant a sens of freedom, came forward, and with her face full of asad yet sweet open, put out her hand. rosamond could not avoidmeet her glanc, could not avoid put her small hand intodorothea’s, which clasp it with gentl motherli; and immediatelya doubt of her own prepossess began to stir within her. rosamond’sey wa quick for face; she saw that mr. casaubon’s face look paleand chang sinc yesterdai, yet gentl, and like the firm soft ofher hand. but dorothea had count a littl too much on her ownstrength: the clear and intens of her mental action thi morningwer the continu of a nervou exalt which made her frame asdanger respons as a bit of finest venetian crystal; and inlook at rosamond, she suddenli found her heart swell, and wasun to speak—all her effort wa requir to keep back tear. shesucceed in that, and the emot onli pass over her face like thespirit of a sob; but it ad to rosamond’s impress that mr.casaubon’s state of mind must be someth quit differ from whatsh had imagin.so thei sat down without a word of prefac on the two chair thathappen to be nearest, and happen also to be close togeth; thoughrosamond’s notion when she first bow wa that she should stai a longwai off from mr. casaubon. but she ceas think how anyth wouldturn out—mere wonder what would come. and dorothea began to speakquit simpli, gather firm as she went on.“i had an errand yesterdai which i did not finish; that is why i amher again so soon. you will not think me too troublesom when i tellyou that i came to talk to you about the injustic that ha been showntoward mr. lydgat. it will cheer you—will it not?—to know a greatdeal about him, that he mai not like to speak about himself justbecaus it is in hi own vindic and to hi own honor. you willlik to know that your husband ha warm friend, who have not left offbeliev in hi high charact? you will let me speak of thi withoutthink that i take a liberti?”the cordial, plead tone which seem to flow with generousheedless abov all the fact which had fill rosamond’s mind asground of obstruct and hatr between her and thi woman, came assoothingli as a warm stream over her shrink fear. of cours mr.casaubon had the fact in her mind, but she wa not go to speak ofanyth connect with them. that relief wa too great for rosamond tofeel much els at the moment. she answer prettili, in the new eas ofher soul—“i know you have been veri good. i shall like to hear anyth you willsai to me about tertiu.”“the dai befor yesterdai,” said dorothea, “when i had ask him tocom to lowick to give me hi opinion on the affair of the hospit,he told me everyth about hi conduct and feel in thi sad eventwhich ha made ignor peopl cast suspicion on him. the reason hetold me wa becaus i wa veri bold and ask him. i believ that hehad never act dishonor, and i beg him to tell me the histori.he confess to me that he had never told it befor, not even to you,becaus he had a great dislik to sai, ‘i wa not wrong,’ as if thatwer proof, when there ar guilti peopl who will sai so. the truth is,he knew noth of thi man raffl, or that there were ani bad secretsabout him; and he thought that mr. bulstrod offer him the moneybecaus he repent, out of kind, of have refus it befor. allhi anxieti about hi patient wa to treat him rightli, and he wa alittl uncomfort that the case did not end as he had expect; buth thought then and still think that there mai have been no wrong init on ani on’s part. and i have told mr. farebroth, and mr. brook,and sir jame chettam: thei all believ in your husband. that willcheer you, will it not? that will give you courag?”dorothea’s face had becom anim, and as it beam on rosamond veryclos to her, she felt someth like bash timid befor asuperior, in the presenc of thi self-forget ardor. she said, withblush embarrass, “thank you: you ar veri kind.”“and he felt that he had been so wrong not to pour out everyth aboutthi to you. but you will forgiv him. it wa becaus he feel so muchmor about your happi than anyth els—he feel hi life boundinto on with your, and it hurt him more than anyth, that hismisfortun must hurt you. he could speak to me becaus i am anindiffer person. and then i ask him if i might come to see you;becaus i felt so much for hi troubl and your. that is why i cameyesterdai, and why i am come to-dai. troubl is so hard to bear, is itnot?— how can we live and think that ani on ha troubl—piercingtroubl—and we could help them, and never try?”dorothea, complet swai by the feel that she wa utter,forgot everyth but that she wa speak from out the heart of herown trial to rosamond’s. the emot had wrought itself more and moreinto her utter, till the tone might have gone to on’s verymarrow, like a low cry from some suffer creatur in the dark.and she had unconsci laid her hand again on the littl hand thatsh had press befor.rosamond, with an overmast pang, as if a wound within her had beenprob, burst into hyster cry as she had done the dai beforewhen she clung to her husband. poor dorothea wa feel a great waveof her own sorrow return over her—her thought be drawn to theposs share that will ladislaw might have in rosamond’s mentaltumult. she wa begin to fear that she should not be abl tosuppress herself enough to the end of thi meet, and while her handwa still rest on rosamond’s lap, though the hand underneath it waswithdrawn, she wa struggl against her own rise sob. she tri tomast herself with the thought that thi might be a turn-point inthre live—not in her own; no, there the irrevoc had happen,but—in those three live which were touch her with the solemnneighborhood of danger and distress. the fragil creatur who wascri close to her—there might still be time to rescu her from themiseri of fals incompat bond; and thi moment wa unlik anyoth: she and rosamond could never be togeth again with the samethril conscious of yesterdai within them both. she felt therel between them to be peculiar enough to give her a peculiarinflu, though she had no concept that the wai in which her ownfeel were involv wa fulli known to mr. lydgat.it wa a newer crisi in rosamond’s experi than even dorothea couldimagin: she wa under the first great shock that had shatter herdream-world in which she had been easili confid of herself andcrit of other; and thi strang unexpect manifest offeel in a woman whom she had approach with a shrink aversionand dread, as on who must necessarili have a jealou hatr towardsh, made her soul totter all the more with a sens that she had beenwalk in an unknown world which had just broken in upon her.when rosamond’s convuls throat wa subsid into calm, and shewithdrew the handkerchief with which she had been hide her face, herey met dorothea’s as helplessli as if thei had been blue flower.what wa the us of think about behavior after thi cry? anddorothea look almost as childish, with the neglect trace of asil tear. pride wa broken down between these two.“we were talk about your husband,” dorothea said, with sometimid. “i thought hi look were sadli chang with suffer theother dai. i had not seen him for mani week befor. he said he hadbeen feel veri lone in hi trial; but i think he would have borneit all better if he had been abl to be quit open with you.”“tertiu is so angri and impati if i sai anyth,” said rosamond,imagin that he had been complain of her to dorothea. “he oughtnot to wonder that i object to speak to him on pain subject.”“it wa himself he blame for not speak,” said dorothea. “what hesaid of you wa, that he could not be happi in do anyth whichmad you unhappi—that hi marriag wa of cours a bond which mustaffect hi choic about everyth; and for that reason he refus mypropos that he should keep hi posit at the hospit, becaus thatwould bind him to stai in middlemarch, and he would not undertak to doanyth which would be pain to you. he could sai that to me,becaus he know that i had much trial in my marriag, from myhusband’s ill, which hinder hi plan and sadden him; and heknow that i have felt how hard it is to walk alwai in fear of hurtinganoth who is ti to us.”dorothea wait a littl; she had discern a faint pleasur stealingov rosamond’s face. but there wa no answer, and she went on, with agath tremor, “marriag is so unlik everyth els. there issometh even aw in the near it bring. even if we love someon els better than—than those we were marri to, it would be nous”—poor dorothea, in her palpit anxieti, could onli seiz herlanguag brokenli—“i mean, marriag drink up all our power of givingor get ani blessed in that sort of love. i know it mai be verydear—but it murder our marriag—and then the marriag stai with uslik a murder—and everyth els is gone. and then our husband—if helov and trust us, and we have not help him, but made a curs inhi life—”her voic had sunk veri low: there wa a dread upon her of presumingtoo far, and of speak as if she herself were perfect addressingerror. she wa too much preoccupi with her own anxieti, to be awarethat rosamond wa trembl too; and fill with the need to expressp fellowship rather than rebuk, she put her hand on rosamond’s,and said with more agit rapid,—“i know, i know that the feelingmai be veri dear—it ha taken hold of us unawar—it is so hard, it mayseem like death to part with it—and we ar weak—i am weak—”the wave of her own sorrow, from out of which she wa struggl tosav anoth, rush over dorothea with conquer forc. she stoppedin speechless agit, not cry, but feel as if she were beinginwardli grappl. her face had becom of a deathlier pale, herlip trembl, and she press her hand helplessli on the hand thatlai under them.rosamond, taken hold of by an emot stronger than her own—hurriedalong in a new movement which gave all thing some new, aw,undefin aspect—could find no word, but involuntarili she put herlip to dorothea’s forehead which wa veri near her, and then for aminut the two women clasp each other as if thei had been in ashipwreck.“you ar think what is not true,” said rosamond, in an eagerhalf-whisper, while she wa still feel dorothea’s arm roundher—urg by a mysteri necess to free herself from someth thatoppress her as if it were blood guilti.thei move apart, look at each other.“when you came in yesterdai—it wa not as you thought,” said rosamondin the same tone.there wa a movement of surpris attent in dorothea. she expect avind of rosamond herself.“he wa tell me how he love anoth woman, that i might know hecould never love me,” said rosamond, get more and more hurri assh went on. “and now i think he hate me becaus—becaus you mistookhim yesterdai. he sai it is through me that you will think ill ofhim—think that he is a fals person. but it shall not be through me. heha never had ani love for me—i know he ha not—he ha alwai thoughtslightli of me. he said yesterdai that no other woman exist for himbesid you. the blame of what happen is entir mine. he said hecould never explain to you—becaus of me. he said you could never thinkwel of him again. but now i have told you, and he cannot reproach meani more.”rosamond had deliv her soul under impuls which she had not knownbefor. she had begun her confess under the subdu influenc ofdorothea’s emot; and as she went on she had gather the sens thatsh wa repel will’s reproach, which were still like aknif-wound within her.the revuls of feel in dorothea wa too strong to be call joi.it wa a tumult in which the terribl strain of the night and morningmad a resist pain:—she could onli perceiv that thi would be joywhen she had recov her power of feel it. her immediateconsci wa on of immens sympathi without check; she care forrosamond without struggl now, and respond earnestli to her lastword—“no, he cannot reproach you ani more.”with her usual tendenc to over-estim the good in other, she felt agreat outgo of her heart toward rosamond, for the gener effortwhich had redeem her from suffer, not count that the effort wasa reflex of her own energi. after thei had been silent a littl, shesaid—“you ar not sorri that i came thi morn?”“no, you have been veri good to me,” said rosamond. “i did not thinkthat you would be so good. i wa veri unhappi. i am not happi now.everyth is so sad.”“but better dai will come. your husband will be rightli valu. and hedepend on you for comfort. he love you best. the worst loss would beto lose that—and you have not lost it,” said dorothea.she tri to thrust awai the too overpow thought of her ownrelief, lest she should fail to win some sign that rosamond’s affectionwa yearn back toward her husband.“tertiu did not find fault with me, then?” said rosamond,understand now that lydgat might have said anyth to mr.casaubon, and that she certainli wa differ from other women.perhap there wa a faint tast of jealousi in the question. a smilebegan to plai over dorothea’s face as she said—“no, inde! how could you imagin it?” but here the door open, andlydg enter.“i am come back in my qualiti of doctor,” he said. “after i went awai,i wa haunt by two pale face: mr. casaubon look as much in needof care as you, rosi. and i thought that i had not done my duti inleav you togeth; so when i had been to coleman’s i came homeagain. i notic that you were walk, mr. casaubon, and the sky haschang—i think we mai have rain. mai i send some on to order yourcarriag to come for you?”“oh, no! i am strong: i need the walk,” said dorothea, rise withanim in her face. “mr. lydgat and i have chat a great deal,and it is time for me to go. i have alwai been accus of beingimmoder and sai too much.”she put out her hand to rosamond, and thei said an earnest, quietgood-by without kiss or other show of effus: there had been betweenthem too much seriou emot for them to us the sign of itsuperfici.as lydgat took her to the door she said noth of rosamond, but toldhim of mr. farebroth and the other friend who had listen withbelief to hi stori.when he came back to rosamond, she had alreadi thrown herself on thesofa, in resign fatigu.“well, rosi,” he said, stand over her, and touch her hair, “whatdo you think of mr. casaubon now you have seen so much of her?”“i think she must be better than ani on,” said rosamond, “and she isveri beauti. if you go to talk to her so often, you will be morediscont with me than ever!”lydgat laugh at the “so often.” “but ha she made you ani lessdiscont with me?”“i think she ha,” said rosamond, look up in hi face. “how heavyyour ey ar, tertiu—and do push your hair back.” he lift up hislarg white hand to obei her, and felt thank for thi littl mark ofinterest in him. poor rosamond’s vagrant fanci had come back terriblyscourg—meek enough to nestl under the old despis shelter. and theshelt wa still there: lydgat had accept hi narrow lot with sadresign. he had chosen thi fragil creatur, and had taken theburthen of her life upon hi arm. he must walk as he could, carryingthat burthen pitifulli.chapter lxxxii.“my grief li onward and my joi behind.”—shakespear: _sonnet_.exil notori feed much on hope, and ar unlik to stai inbanish unless thei ar oblig. when will ladislaw exil himselffrom middlemarch he had place no stronger obstacl to hi return thanhi own resolv, which wa by no mean an iron barrier, but simpli astat of mind liabl to melt into a minuet with other state of mind,and to find itself bow, smile, and give place with politefacil. as the month went on, it had seem more and more difficultto him to sai why he should not run down to middlemarch—mere for thesak of hear someth about dorothea; and if on such a fly visith should chanc by some strang coincid to meet with her, therewa no reason for him to be asham of have taken an innoc journeywhich he had beforehand suppos that he should not take. sinc he washopelessli divid from her, he might sure ventur into herneighborhood; and as to the suspici friend who kept a dragon watchov her—their opinion seem less and less import with time andchang of air.and there had come a reason quit irrespect of dorothea, whichseem to make a journei to middlemarch a sort of philanthrop duti.will had given a disinterest attent to an intend settlement on anew plan in the far west, and the need for fund in order to carri outa good design had set him on debat with himself whether it would notb a laudabl us to make of hi claim on bulstrod, to urg theapplic of that monei which had been offer to himself as a meansof carri out a scheme like to be larg benefici. the questionseem a veri dubiou on to will, and hi repugn to again enteringinto ani relat with the banker might have made him dismiss itquickli, if there had not arisen in hi imagin the probabilitythat hi judgment might be more safe determin by a visit tomiddlemarch.that wa the object which will state to himself as a reason for comingdown. he had meant to confid in lydgat, and discuss the moneyquest with him, and he had meant to amus himself for the feweven of hi stai by have a great deal of music and badinag withfair rosamond, without neglect hi friend at lowick parsonag:—ifth parsonag wa close to the manor, that wa no fault of hi. he hadneglect the farebroth befor hi departur, from a proudresist to the possibl accus of indirectli seek interviewswith dorothea; but hunger tame us, and will had becom veri hungri forth vision of a certain form and the sound of a certain voic. nothinghad done instead—not the opera, or the convers of zealou politician,or the flatter recept (in dim corner) of hi new hand in leadingarticl.thu he had come down, forese with confid how almost everythingwould be in hi familiar littl world; fear, inde, that therewould be no surpris in hi visit. but he had found that humdrum worldin a terribl dynam condit, in which even badinag and lyrism hadturn explos; and the first dai of thi visit had becom the mostfat epoch of hi life. the next morn he felt so harass with thenightmar of consequ—he dread so much the immedi issuesbefor him—that see while he breakfast the arriv of theriverston coach, he went out hurriedli and took hi place on it, thath might be reliev, at least for a dai, from the necess of doingor sai anyth in middlemarch. will ladislaw wa in on of thosetangl crise which ar common in experi than on might imagin,from the shallow absolut of men’s judgment. he had found lydgat,for whom he had the sincerest respect, under circumst whichclaim hi thorough and frankli declar sympathi; and the reason why,in spite of that claim, it would have been better for will to haveavoid all further intimaci, or even contact, with lydgat, wasprecis of the kind to make such a cours appear imposs. to acreatur of will’s suscept tempera—without ani neutral regionof indiffer in hi natur, readi to turn everyth that befel himinto the collis of a passion drama—the revel that rosamondhad made her happi in ani wai depend on him wa a difficultywhich hi outburst of rage toward her had immeasur increas forhim. he hate hi own cruelti, and yet he dread to show the fulnessof hi relent: he must go to her again; the friendship could not beput to a sudden end; and her unhappi wa a power which he dread.and all the while there wa no more foretast of enjoy in the lifebefor him than if hi limb had been lop off and he wa make hisfresh start on crutch. in the night he had debat whether he shouldnot get on the coach, not for riverston, but for london, leav a noteto lydgat which would give a makeshift reason for hi retreat. butther were strong cord pull him back from that abrupt departur:the blight on hi happi in think of dorothea, the crush ofthat chief hope which had remain in spite of the acknowledgednecess for renunci, wa too fresh a miseri for him to resignhimself to it and go straightwai into a distanc which wa alsodespair.thu he did noth more decid than take the riverston coach. hecam back again by it while it wa still daylight, have made up hismind that he must go to lydgat’s that even. the rubicon, we know,wa a veri insignific stream to look at; it signific layentir in certain invis condit. will felt as if he wereforc to cross hi small boundari ditch, and what he saw beyond it wasnot empir, but discont subject.but it is given to us sometim even in our everi-dai life to witnessth save influenc of a nobl natur, the divin efficaci of rescuethat mai lie in a self-subdu act of fellowship. if dorothea, afterh night’s anguish, had not taken that walk to rosamond—why, sheperhap would have been a woman who gain a higher charact fordiscret, but it would certainli not have been as well for thosethre who were on on hearth in lydgat’s hous at half-past seven thateven.rosamond had been prepar for will’s visit, and she receiv him witha languid cold which lydgat account for by her nervousexhaust, of which he could not suppos that it had ani relat towil. and when she sat in silenc bend over a bit of work, heinnoc apolog for her in an indirect wai by beg her to leanbackward and rest. will wa miser in the necess for plai thepart of a friend who wa make hi first appear and greet torosamond, while hi thought were busi about her feel sinc thatscen of yesterdai, which seem still inexor to enclos them both,like the pain vision of a doubl mad. it happen that nothingcal lydgat out of the room; but when rosamond pour out the tea,and will came near to fetch it, she place a tini bit of fold paperin hi saucer. he saw it and secur it quickli, but as he went back tohi inn he had no eager to unfold the paper. what rosamond hadwritten to him would probabl deepen the pain impress of theeven. still, he open and read it by hi bed-candl. there wereonli these few word in her neatli flow hand:—“i have told mr. casaubon. she is not under ani mistak about you. itold her becaus she came to see me and wa veri kind. you will havenoth to reproach me with now. i shall not have made ani differenceto you.”the effect of these word wa not quit all glad. as will dwelt onthem with excit imagin, he felt hi cheek and ear burn atth thought of what had occur between dorothea and rosamond—at theuncertainti how far dorothea might still feel her digniti wound inhav an explan of hi conduct offer to her. there might stillremain in her mind a chang associ with him which made anirremedi differ—a last flaw. with activ fanci he wroughthimself into a state of doubt littl more easi than that of the man whoha escap from wreck by night and stand on unknown ground in thedark. until that wretch yesterdai—except the moment of vexationlong ago in the veri same room and in the veri same presenc—all theirvis, all their thought of each other, had been as in a world apart,where the sunshin fell on tall white lili, where no evil lurk, andno other soul enter. but now—would dorothea meet him in that worldagain?chapter lxxxiii.“and now good-morrow to our wake soulswhich watch not on anoth out of fear;for love all love of other sight control,and make on littl room, an everywher.”—dr. donn.on the second morn after dorothea’s visit to rosamond, she had hadtwo night of sound sleep, and had not onli lost all trace of fatigu,but felt as if she had a great deal of superflu strength—that is tosai, more strength than she could manag to concentr on anyoccup. the dai befor, she had taken long walk outsid theground, and had paid two visit to the parsonag; but she never in herlif told ani on the reason why she spent her time in that fruitlessmann, and thi morn she wa rather angri with herself for herchildish restless. to-dai wa to be spent quit differ. whatwa there to be done in the villag? oh dear! noth. everybodi waswel and had flannel; nobodi’s pig had di; and it wa saturdaymorn, when there wa a gener scrub of door and door-stone,and when it wa useless to go into the school. but there were varioussubject that dorothea wa try to get clear upon, and she resolvedto throw herself energet into the gravest of all. she sat down inth librari befor her particular littl heap of book on politicaleconomi and kindr matter, out of which she wa try to get lighta to the best wai of spend monei so as not to injur on’sneighbor, or—what come to the same thing—so as to do them the mostgood. here wa a weighti subject which, if she could but lai hold ofit, would certainli keep her mind steadi. unhappili her mind slippedoff it for a whole hour; and at the end she found herself readingsent twice over with an intens conscious of mani thing, butnot of ani on thing contain in the text. thi wa hopeless. shouldsh order the carriag and drive to tipton? no; for some reason oroth she prefer stai at lowick. but her vagrant mind must bereduc to order: there wa an art in self-disciplin; and she walkedround and round the brown librari consid by what sort of manoeuvresh could arrest her wander thought. perhap a mere task wa thebest mean—someth to which she must go doggedli. wa there not thegeographi of asia minor, in which her slack had often been rebukedbi mr. casaubon? she went to the cabinet of map and unrol on: thismorn she might make herself final sure that paphlagonia wa not onth levantin coast, and fix her total dark about the chalybesfirmli on the shore of the euxin. a map wa a fine thing to studywhen you were dispos to think of someth els, be made up ofnam that would turn into a chime if you went back upon them. dorotheaset earnestli to work, bend close to her map, and utter the namesin an audibl, subdu tone, which often got into a chime. she lookedamusingli girlish after all her deep experi—nod her head andmark the name off on her finger, with a littl purs of her lip,and now and then break off to put her hand on each side of her faceand sai, “oh dear! oh dear!”there wa no reason why thi should end ani more than a merri-go-round;but it wa at last interrupt by the open of the door and theannounc of miss nobl.the littl old ladi, whose bonnet hardli reach dorothea’s shoulder,wa warmli welcom, but while her hand wa be press she made manyof her beaver-like nois, as if she had someth difficult to sai.“do sit down,” said dorothea, roll a chair forward. “am i want foranyth? i shall be so glad if i can do anyth.”“i will not stai,” said miss nobl, put her hand into her smallbasket, and hold some articl insid it nervous; “i have left afriend in the churchyard.” she laps into her inarticul sound, andunconsci drew forth the articl which she wa finger. it wasth tortois-shell lozeng-box, and dorothea felt the color mount toher cheek.“mr. ladislaw,” continu the timid littl woman. “he fear he hasoffend you, and ha beg me to ask if you will see him for a fewminut.”dorothea did not answer on the instant: it wa cross her mind thatsh could not receiv him in thi librari, where her husband’sprohibit seem to dwell. she look toward the window. could shego out and meet him in the ground? the sky wa heavi, and the treeshad begun to shiver as at a come storm. besid, she shrank fromgo out to him.“do see him, mr. casaubon,” said miss nobl, pathet; “els imust go back and sai no, and that will hurt him.”“ye, i will see him,” said dorothea. “prai tell him to come.”what els wa there to be done? there wa noth that she long forat that moment except to see will: the possibl of see him hadthrust itself insist between her and everi other object; and yetsh had a throb excit like an alarm upon her—a sens that shewa do someth daringli defiant for hi sake.when the littl ladi had trot awai on her mission, dorothea stood inth middl of the librari with her hand fall clasp befor her,make no attempt to compos herself in an attitud of dignifiedunconsci. what she wa least consciou of just then wa her ownbodi: she wa think of what wa like to be in will’s mind, and ofth hard feel that other had had about him. how could ani dutybind her to hard? resist to unjust disprais had mingl withher feel for him from the veri first, and now in the rebound of herheart after her anguish the resist wa stronger than ever. “if ilov him too much it is becaus he ha been us so ill:”—there wa avoic within her sai thi to some imagin audienc in the librari,when the door wa open, and she saw will befor her.she did not move, and he came toward her with more doubt and timidityin hi face than she had ever seen befor. he wa in a state ofuncertainti which made him afraid lest some look or word of hi shouldcondemn him to a new distanc from her; and dorothea wa afraid of her_own_ emot. she look as if there were a spell upon her, keepingh motionless and hinder her from unclasp her hand, while someintens, grave yearn wa imprison within her ey. see that shedid not put out her hand as usual, will paus a yard from her and saidwith embarrass, “i am so grate to you for see me.”“i want to see you,” said dorothea, have no other word at command.it did not occur to her to sit down, and will did not give a cheerfulinterpret to thi queenli wai of receiv him; but he went on tosai what he had made up hi mind to sai.“i fear you think me foolish and perhap wrong for come back so soon.i have been punish for my impati. you know—everi on know now—apain stori about my parentag. i knew of it befor i went awai, andi alwai meant to tell you of it if—if we ever met again.”there wa a slight movement in dorothea, and she unclasp her hand,but immedi fold them over each other.“but the affair is matter of gossip now,” will continu. “i wish youto know that someth connect with it—someth which happenedbefor i went awai, help to bring me down here again. at least ithought it excus my come. it wa the idea of get bulstrod toappli some monei to a public purpos—some monei which he had thought ofgiv me. perhap it is rather to bulstrod’s credit that he privatelyoff me compens for an old injuri: he offer to give me a goodincom to make amend; but i suppos you know the disagre stori?”will look doubtfulli at dorothea, but hi manner wa gather someof the defiant courag with which he alwai thought of thi fact in hisdestini. he ad, “you know that it must be altogeth pain to me.”“ye—ye—i know,” said dorothea, hastili.“i did not choos to accept an incom from such a sourc. i wa surethat you would not think well of me if i did so,” said will. why shouldh mind sai anyth of that sort to her now? she knew that he hadavow hi love for her. “i felt that”—he broke off, nevertheless.“you act as i should have expect you to act,” said dorothea, herfac brighten and her head becom a littl more erect on itsbeauti stem.“i did not believ that you would let ani circumst of my birthcreat a prejudic in you against me, though it wa sure to do so inoth,” said will, shake hi head backward in hi old wai, andlook with a grave appeal into her ey.“if it were a new hardship it would be a new reason for me to cling toyou,” said dorothea, fervidli. “noth could have chang me but—” herheart wa swell, and it wa difficult to go on; she made a greateffort over herself to sai in a low tremul voic, “but think thatyou were differ—not so good as i had believ you to be.”“you ar sure to believ me better than i am in everyth but on,”said will, give wai to hi own feel in the evid of her. “imean, in my truth to you. when i thought you doubt of that, i didn’tcare about anyth that wa left. i thought it wa all over with me,and there wa noth to try for—onli thing to endur.”“i don’t doubt you ani longer,” said dorothea, put out her hand; avagu fear for him impel her unutter affect.he took her hand and rais it to hi lip with someth like a sob.but he stood with hi hat and glove in the other hand, and might havedon for the portrait of a royalist. still it wa difficult to looseth hand, and dorothea, withdraw it in a confus that distressedh, look and move awai.“see how dark the cloud have becom, and how the tree ar toss,”she said, walk toward the window, yet speak and move with onlya dim sens of what she wa do.will follow her at a littl distanc, and lean against the tallback of a leather chair, on which he ventur now to lai hi hat andglov, and free himself from the intoler duranc of formal towhich he had been for the first time condemn in dorothea’s presenc.it must be confess that he felt veri happi at that moment lean onth chair. he wa not much afraid of anyth that she might feel now.thei stood silent, not look at each other, but look at theevergreen which were be toss, and were show the pale undersideof their leav against the blacken sky. will never enjoi theprospect of a storm so much: it deliv him from the necess ofgo awai. leav and littl branch were hurl about, and thethund wa get nearer. the light wa more and more sombr, butther came a flash of lightn which made them start and look at eachoth, and then smile. dorothea began to sai what she had been thinkingof.“that wa a wrong thing for you to sai, that you would have had nothingto try for. if we had lost our own chief good, other peopl’s goodwould remain, and that is worth try for. some can be happi. i seemedto see that more clearli than ever, when i wa the most wretch. i canhardli think how i could have born the troubl, if that feel hadnot come to me to make strength.”“you have never felt the sort of miseri i felt,” said will; “the miseryof know that you must despis me.”“but i have felt wors—it wa wors to think ill—” dorothea had begunimpetu, but broke off.will color. he had the sens that whatev she said wa utter inth vision of a fatal that kept them apart. he wa silent a moment,and then said passion—“we mai at least have the comfort of speak to each other withoutdisguis. sinc i must go awai—sinc we must alwai be divid—you maythink of me as on on the brink of the grave.”while he wa speak there came a vivid flash of lightn which liteach of them up for the other—and the light seem to be the terror ofa hopeless love. dorothea dart instantan from the window; willfollow her, seiz her hand with a spasmod movement; and so theystood, with their hand clasp, like two children, look out on thestorm, while the thunder gave a tremend crack and roll abov them,and the rain began to pour down. then thei turn their face towardseach other, with the memori of hi last word in them, and thei did notloos each other’s hand.“there is no hope for me,” said will. “even if you love me as well asi love you—even if i were everyth to you—i shall most like alwaysb veri poor: on a sober calcul, on can count on noth but acreep lot. it is imposs for us ever to belong to each other. iti perhap base of me to have ask for a word from you. i meant to goawai into silenc, but i have not been abl to do what i meant.”“don’t be sorri,” said dorothea, in her clear tender tone. “i wouldrath share all the troubl of our part.”her lip trembl, and so did hi. it wa never known which lip wereth first to move toward the other lip; but thei kiss tremblingli,and then thei move apart.the rain wa dash against the window-pane as if an angri spiritwer within it, and behind it wa the great swoop of the wind; it wason of those moment in which both the busi and the idl paus with acertain aw.dorothea sat down on the seat nearest to her, a long low ottoman in themiddl of the room, and with her hand fold over each other on herlap, look at the drear outer world. will stood still an instantlook at her, then seat himself besid her, and laid hi hand onher, which turn itself upward to be clasp. thei sat in that waywithout look at each other, until the rain abat and began to fallin still. each had been full of thought which neither of themcould begin to utter.but when the rain wa quiet, dorothea turn to look at will. withpassion exclam, as if some tortur screw were threaten him,he start up and said, “it is imposs!”he went and lean on the back of the chair again, and seem to bebattl with hi own anger, while she look toward him sadli.“it is as fatal as a murder or ani other horror that divid peopl,”he burst out again; “it is more intoler—to have our life maim bypetti accid.”“no—don’t sai that—your life need not be maim,” said dorothea,gentli.“ye, it must,” said will, angrili. “it is cruel of you to speak inthat wai—as if there were ani comfort. you mai see beyond the miseri ofit, but i don’t. it is unkind—it is throw back my love for you as ifit were a trifl, to speak in that wai in the face of the fact. we cannev be marri.”“some time—we might,” said dorothea, in a trembl voic.“when?” said will, bitterli. “what is the us of count on anysuccess of mine? it is a mere toss up whether i shall ever do more thankeep myself decent, unless i choos to sell myself as a mere pen anda mouthpiec. i can see that clearli enough. i could not offer myselfto ani woman, even if she had no luxuri to renounc.”there wa silenc. dorothea’s heart wa full of someth that shewant to sai, and yet the word were too difficult. she wa whollypossess by them: at that moment debat wa mute within her. and itwa veri hard that she could not sai what she want to sai. will waslook out of the window angrili. if he would have look at her andnot gone awai from her side, she thought everyth would have beeneasi. at last he turn, still rest against the chair, andstretch hi hand automat toward hi hat, said with a sort ofexasper, “good-by.”“oh, i cannot bear it—my heart will break,” said dorothea, startingfrom her seat, the flood of her young passion bear down all theobstruct which had kept her silent—the great tear rise andfal in an instant: “i don’t mind about poverti—i hate my wealth.”in an instant will wa close to her and had hi arm round her, but shedrew her head back and held hi awai gentli that she might go onspeak, her larg tear-fill ey look at hi veri simpli, whilesh said in a sob childlik wai, “we could live quit well on myown fortun—it is too much—seven hundr a-year—i want so littl—no newcloth—and i will learn what everyth cost.”chapter lxxxiv.“though it be song of old and yong, that i shold be to blame,theyr be the charg, that spoke so larg in hurtyng of my name.”—_the not-brown mayd_.it wa just after the lord had thrown out the reform bill: thatexplain how mr. cadwallad came to be walk on the slope of thelawn near the great conservatori at freshitt hall, hold the “time”in hi hand behind him, while he talk with a trout-fisher’sdispassion about the prospect of the countri to sir jameschettam. mr. cadwallad, the dowag ladi chettam, and celia weresometim seat on garden-chair, sometim walk to meet littlearthur, who wa be drawn in hi chariot, and, as becam theinfantin bouddha, wa shelter by hi sacr umbrella with handsomesilken fring.the ladi also talk polit, though more fitfulli. mr. cadwalladerwa strong on the intend creation of peer: she had it for certainfrom her cousin that truberri had gone over to the other side entirelyat the instig of hi wife, who had scent peerag in the airfrom the veri first introduct of the reform question, and would signher soul awai to take preced of her younger sister, who had marrieda baronet. ladi chettam thought that such conduct wa veryreprehens, and rememb that mr. truberri’s mother wa a misswalsingham of melspr. celia confess it wa nicer to be “ladi” than“mr.,” and that dodo never mind about preced if she could haveh own wai. mr. cadwallad held that it wa a poor satisfact totak preced when everybodi about you knew that you had not a dropof good blood in your vein; and celia again, stop to look atarthur, said, “it would be veri nice, though, if he were a viscount—andhi lordship’s littl tooth come through! he might have been, ifjam had been an earl.”“my dear celia,” said the dowag, “jame’s titl is worth far morethan ani new earldom. i never wish hi father to be anyth elsethan sir jame.”“oh, i onli meant about arthur’s littl tooth,” said celia,comfort. “but see, here is my uncl come.”she trip off to meet her uncl, while sir jame and mr. cadwalladercam forward to make on group with the ladi. celia had slip herarm through her uncl’s, and he pat her hand with a rathermelancholi “well, my dear!” as thei approach, it wa evid that mr.brook wa look deject, but thi wa fulli account for by thestat of polit; and as he wa shake hand all round without moregreet than a “well, you’re all here, you know,” the rector said,laughingli—“don’t take the throw out of the bill so much to heart, brook;you’ve got all the riff-raff of the countri on your side.”“the bill, eh? ah!” said mr. brook, with a mild distracted ofmann. “thrown out, you know, eh? the lord ar go too far, though.thei’ll have to pull up. sad new, you know. i mean, here at home—sadnew. but you must not blame me, chettam.”“what is the matter?” said sir jame. “not anoth gamekeep shot, ihop? it’s what i should expect, when a fellow like trap bass islet off so easili.”“gamekeep? no. let us go in; i can tell you all in the hous, youknow,” said mr. brook, nod at the cadwallad, to show that heinclud them in hi confid. “as to poacher like trap bass,you know, chettam,” he continu, as thei were enter, “when you area magistr, you’ll not find it so easi to commit. sever is allveri well, but it’s a great deal easier when you’ve got somebodi to doit for you. you have a soft place in your heart yourself, youknow—you’re not a draco, a jeffrei, that sort of thing.”mr. brook wa evid in a state of nervou perturb. when hehad someth pain to tell, it wa usual hi wai to introduc itamong a number of disjoint particular, as if it were a medicin thatwould get a milder flavor by mix. he continu hi chat with sirjam about the poacher until thei were all seat, and mr.cadwallad, impati of thi drivel, said—“i’m dy to know the sad new. the gamekeep is not shot: that issettl. what is it, then?”“well, it’s a veri try thing, you know,” said mr. brook. “i’m gladyou and the rector ar here; it’s a famili matter—but you will help usal to bear it, cadwallad. i’ve got to break it to you, my dear.”here mr. brook look at celia—“you’ve no notion what it is, you know.and, chettam, it will annoi you uncommonli—but, you see, you have notbeen abl to hinder it, ani more than i have. there’s somethingsingular in thing: thei come round, you know.”“it must be about dodo,” said celia, who had been us to think of hersist as the danger part of the famili machineri. she had seatedherself on a low stool against her husband’s knee.“for god’s sake let us hear what it is!” said sir jame.“well, you know, chettam, i couldn’t help casaubon’s will: it wa asort of will to make thing wors.”“exactli,” said sir jame, hastili. “but _what_ is wors?”“dorothea is go to be marri again, you know,” said mr. brook,nod toward celia, who immedi look up at her husband with afrighten glanc, and put her hand on hi knee. sir jame wa almostwhit with anger, but he did not speak.“merci heaven!” said mr. cadwallad. “not to _young_ ladislaw?”mr. brook nod, sai, “ye; to ladislaw,” and then fell into aprudenti silenc.“you see, humphrei!” said mr. cadwallad, wave her arm toward herhusband. “anoth time you will admit that i have some foresight; orrath you will contradict me and be just as blind as ever. _you_suppos that the young gentleman wa gone out of the countri.”“so he might be, and yet come back,” said the rector, quietli.“when did you learn thi?” said sir jame, not like to hear ani oneels speak, though find it difficult to speak himself.“yesterdai,” said mr. brook, meekli. “i went to lowick. dorothea sentfor me, you know. it had come about quit suddenli—neither of them hadani idea two dai ago—not ani idea, you know. there’s somethingsingular in thing. but dorothea is quit determin—it is no useoppos. i put it strongli to her. i did my duti, chettam. but she canact as she like, you know.”“it would have been better if i had call him out and shot him a yearago,” said sir jame, not from bloodi-minded, but becaus he neededsometh strong to sai.“realli, jame, that would have been veri disagre,” said celia.“be reason, chettam. look at the affair more quietli,” said mr.cadwallad, sorri to see hi good-natur friend so overmast byanger.“that is not so veri easi for a man of ani digniti—with ani sens ofright—when the affair happen to be in hi own famili,” said sir jame,still in hi white indign. “it is perfectli scandal. ifladislaw had had a spark of honor he would have gone out of the countryat onc, and never shown hi face in it again. howev, i am notsurpris. the dai after casaubon’s funer i said what ought to bedon. but i wa not listen to.”“you want what wa imposs, you know, chettam,” said mr. brook.“you want him ship off. i told you ladislaw wa not to be done asw like with: he had hi idea. he wa a remark fellow—i alwayssaid he wa a remark fellow.”“ye,” said sir jame, unabl to repress a retort, “it is rather a pityy form that high opinion of him. we ar indebt to that for hisb lodg in thi neighborhood. we ar indebt to that for see awoman like dorothea degrad herself by marri him.” sir jame madelittl stoppag between hi claus, the word not come easili. “aman so mark out by her husband’s will, that delicaci ought to haveforbidden her from see him again—who take her out of her properrank—into poverti—ha the mean to accept such a sacrific—hasalwai had an objection posit—a bad origin—and, _i believ_, isa man of littl principl and light charact. that is my opinion.” sirjam end emphat, turn asid and cross hi leg.“i point everyth out to her,” said mr. brook, apologet—“imean the poverti, and abandon her posit. i said, ‘my dear, youdon’t know what it is to live on seven hundr a-year, and have nocarriag, and that kind of thing, and go amongst peopl who don’t knowwho you ar.’ i put it strongli to her. but i advis you to talk todorothea herself. the fact is, she ha a dislik to casaubon’sproperti. you will hear what she sai, you know.”“no—excus me—i shall not,” said sir jame, with more cool. “icannot bear to see her again; it is too pain. it hurt me too muchthat a woman like dorothea should have done what is wrong.”“be just, chettam,” said the easi, larg-lip rector, who object toall thi unnecessari discomfort. “mr. casaubon mai be actingimprud: she is give up a fortun for the sake of a man, and wemen have so poor an opinion of each other that we can hardli call awoman wise who doe that. but i think you should not condemn it as awrong action, in the strict sens of the word.”“ye, i do,” answer sir jame. “i think that dorothea commit a wrongact in marri ladislaw.”“my dear fellow, we ar rather apt to consid an act wrong becaus iti unpleas to us,” said the rector, quietli. like mani men who takelif easili, he had the knack of sai a home truth occasion tothos who felt themselv virtuous out of temper. sir jame took outhi handkerchief and began to bite the corner.“it is veri dread of dodo, though,” said celia, wish to justifyh husband. “she said she _never would_ marri again—not anybodi atal.”“i heard her sai the same thing myself,” said ladi chettam,majest, as if thi were royal evid.“oh, there is usual a silent except in such case,” said mr.cadwallad. “the onli wonder to me is, that ani of you ar surpris.you did noth to hinder it. if you would have had lord triton downher to woo her with hi philanthropi, he might have carri her offbefor the year wa over. there wa no safeti in anyth els. mr.casaubon had prepar all thi as beautifulli as possibl. he madehimself disagre—or it pleas god to make him so—and then he daredh to contradict him. it’s the wai to make ani trumperi tempt, toticket it at a high price in that wai.”“i don’t know what you mean by wrong, cadwallad,” said sir jame,still feel a littl stung, and turn round in hi chair towardsth rector. “he’s not a man we can take into the famili. at least, imust speak for myself,” he continu, carefulli keep hi ey offmr. brook. “i suppos other will find hi societi too pleasant tocar about the proprieti of the thing.”“well, you know, chettam,” said mr. brook, good-humoredli, nurs hisleg, “i can’t turn my back on dorothea. i must be a father to her up toa certain point. i said, ‘my dear, i won’t refus to give you awai.’ ihad spoken strongli befor. but i can cut off the entail, you know. itwil cost monei and be troublesom; but i can do it, you know.”mr. brook nod at sir jame, and felt that he wa both show hisown forc of resolut and propiti what wa just in the baronet’svexat. he had hit on a more ingeni mode of parri than he wasawar of. he had touch a motiv of which sir jame wa asham. themass of hi feel about dorothea’s marriag to ladislaw wa duepartli to excus prejudic, or even justifi opinion, partli to ajeal repugn hardli less in ladislaw’s case than in casaubon’s.he wa convinc that the marriag wa a fatal on for dorothea. butamid that mass ran a vein of which he wa too good and honor a manto like the avow even to himself: it wa undeni that the union ofth two estat—tipton and freshitt—ly charmingli within ar-fenc, wa a prospect that flatter him for hi son and heir.henc when mr. brook noddingli appeal to that motiv, sir jame felta sudden embarrass; there wa a stoppag in hi throat; he evenblush. he had found more word than usual in the first jet of hisang, but mr. brook’s propiti wa more clog to hi tonguethan mr. cadwallad’s caustic hint.but celia wa glad to have room for speech after her uncl’s suggestionof the marriag ceremoni, and she said, though with as littl eagernessof manner as if the question had turn on an invit to dinner, “doyou mean that dodo is go to be marri directli, uncl?”“in three week, you know,” said mr. brook, helplessli. “i can donoth to hinder it, cadwallad,” he ad, turn for a littlecounten toward the rector, who said—“_i_ should not make ani fuss about it. if she like to be poor, thati her affair. nobodi would have said anyth if she had marri theyoung fellow becaus he wa rich. plenti of benef clergi ar poorerthan thei will be. here is elinor,” continu the provok husband;“she vex her friend by me: i had hardli a thousand a-year—i wa alout—nobodi could see anyth in me—my shoe were not the rightcut—all the men wonder how a woman could like me. upon my word, imust take ladislaw’s part until i hear more harm of him.”“humphrei, that is all sophistri, and you know it,” said hi wife.“everyth is all on—that is the begin and end with you. as ifyou had not been a cadwallad! doe ani on suppos that i would havetaken such a monster as you by ani other name?”“and a clergyman too,” observ ladi chettam with approb. “elinorcannot be said to have descend below her rank. it is difficult to saywhat mr. ladislaw is, eh, jame?”sir jame gave a small grunt, which wa less respect than hi usualmod of answer hi mother. celia look up at him like a thoughtfulkitten.“it must be admit that hi blood is a fright mixtur!” said mr.cadwallad. “the casaubon cuttl-fish fluid to begin with, and then arebelli polish fiddler or danc-master, wa it?—and then an oldclo—”“nonsens, elinor,” said the rector, rise. “it is time for us to go.”“after all, he is a pretti sprig,” said mr. cadwallad, rise too,and wish to make amend. “he is like the fine old crichlei portraitsbefor the idiot came in.”“i’ll go with you,” said mr. brook, start up with alacr. “youmust all come and dine with me to-morrow, you know—eh, celia, my dear?”“you will, jame—won’t you?” said celia, take her husband’s hand.“oh, of cours, if you like,” said sir jame, pull down hiswaistcoat, but unabl yet to adjust hi face good-humoredli. “that isto sai, if it is not to meet anybodi els.”“no, no, no,” said mr. brook, understand the condit. “dorotheawould not come, you know, unless you had been to see her.”when sir jame and celia were alon, she said, “do you mind about myhav the carriag to go to lowick, jame?”“what, now, directli?” he answer, with some surpris.“ye, it is veri import,” said celia.“rememb, celia, i cannot see her,” said sir jame.“not if she gave up marri?”“what is the us of sai that?—howev, i’m go to the stabl.i’ll tell brigg to bring the carriag round.”celia thought it wa of great us, if not to sai that, at least to takea journei to lowick in order to influenc dorothea’s mind. all throughtheir girlhood she had felt that she could act on her sister by a wordjudici place—by open a littl window for the daylight of herown understand to enter among the strang color lamp by whichdodo habitu saw. and celia the matron natur felt more abl toadvis her childless sister. how could ani on understand dodo so wella celia did or love her so tenderli?dorothea, busi in her boudoir, felt a glow of pleasur at the sight ofher sister so soon after the revel of her intend marriag. shehad prefigur to herself, even with exagger, the disgust of herfriend, and she had even fear that celia might be kept aloof fromher.“o kitti, i am delight to see you!” said dorothea, put her handson celia’s shoulder, and beam on her. “i almost thought you wouldnot come to me.”“i have not brought arthur, becaus i wa in a hurri,” said celia, andthei sat down on two small chair opposit each other, with their kneestouch.“you know, dodo, it is veri bad,” said celia, in her placid guttur,look as prettili free from humor as possibl. “you havedisappoint us all so. and i can’t think that it ever _will_ be—younev can go and live in that wai. and then there ar all your plan!you never can have thought of that. jame would have taken ani troublefor you, and you might have gone on all your life do what youlik.”“on the contrari, dear,” said dorothea, “i never could do anyth thati like. i have never carri out ani plan yet.”“becaus you alwai want thing that wouldn’t do. but other planswould have come. and how _can_ you marri mr. ladislaw, that we none ofu ever thought you _could_ marri? it shock jame so dreadfulli. andthen it is all so differ from what you have alwai been. you wouldhav mr. casaubon becaus he had such a great soul, and wa so old anddism and learn; and now, to think of marri mr. ladislaw, who hasgot no estat or anyth. i suppos it is becaus you must be makingyourself uncomfort in some wai or other.”dorothea laugh.“well, it is veri seriou, dodo,” said celia, becom more impress.“how will you live? and you will go awai among queer peopl. and ishal never see you—and you won’t mind about littl arthur—and ithought you alwai would—”celia’s rare tear had got into her ey, and the corner of her mouthwer agit.“dear celia,” said dorothea, with tender graviti, “if you don’t everse me, it will not be my fault.”“ye, it will,” said celia, with the same touch distort of hersmal featur. “how can i come to you or have you with me when jamescan’t bear it?—that is becaus he think it is not right—he think youar so wrong, dodo. but you alwai were wrong: onli i can’t help lovingy. and nobodi can think where you will live: where can you go?”“i am go to london,” said dorothea.“how can you alwai live in a street? and you will be so poor. i couldgiv you half my thing, onli how can i, when i never see you?”“bless you, kitti,” said dorothea, with gentl warmth. “take comfort:perhap jame will forgiv me some time.”“but it would be much better if you would not be marri,” said celia,dry her ey, and return to her argument; “then there would benoth uncomfort. and you would not do what nobodi thought youcould do. jame alwai said you ought to be a queen; but thi is not atal be like a queen. you know what mistak you have alwai beenmak, dodo, and thi is anoth. nobodi think mr. ladislaw a properhusband for you. and you _said_ you would never be marri again.”“it is quit true that i might be a wiser person, celia,” saiddorothea, “and that i might have done someth better, if i had beenbett. but thi is what i am go to do. i have promis to marri mr.ladislaw; and i am go to marri him.”the tone in which dorothea said thi wa a note that celia had longlearn to recogn. she wa silent a few moment, and then said, asif she had dismiss all contest, “is he veri fond of you, dodo?”“i hope so. i am veri fond of him.”“that is nice,” said celia, comfort. “onli i would rather you hadsuch a sort of husband as jame is, with a place veri near, that icould drive to.”dorothea smile, and celia look rather medit. present shesaid, “i cannot think how it all came about.” celia thought it would bepleas to hear the stori.“i dare sai not,” said dorothea, pinch her sister’s chin. “if youknew how it came about, it would not seem wonder to you.”“can’t you tell me?” said celia, settl her arm cozili.“no, dear, you would have to feel with me, els you would never know.”chapter lxxxv.“then went the juri out whose name were mr. blindman, mr. no-good, mr.malic, mr. love-lust, mr. live-loos, mr. headi, mr. high-mind, mr.enmiti, mr. liar, mr. cruelti, mr. hate-light, mr. implac, whoeveri on gave in hi privat verdict against him among themselv, andafterward unanim conclud to bring him in guilti befor thejudg. and first among themselv, mr. blindman, the foreman, said, ise clearli that thi man is a heret. then said mr. no-good, awaywith such a fellow from the earth! ay, said mr. malic, for i hate theveri look of him. then said mr. love-lust, i could never endur him.nor i, said mr. live-loos; for he would be alwai condemn my wai.hang him, hang him, said mr. headi. a sorri scrub, said mr. high-mind.my heart riseth against him, said mr. enmiti. he is a rogu, said mr.liar. hang is too good for him, said mr. cruelti. let us despatchhim out of the wai said mr. hate-light. then said mr. implac, mighti have all the world given me, i could not be reconcil to him;therefor let us forthwith bring him in guilti of death.”—_pilgrim’sprogress_.when immort bunyan make hi pictur of the persecut passionsbring in their verdict of guilti, who piti faith? that is arar and bless lot which some greatest men have not attain, to knowourselv guiltless befor a condemn crowd—to be sure that what wear denounc for is sole the good in us. the pitiabl lot is that ofth man who could not call himself a martyr even though he were topersuad himself that the men who stone him were but ugli passionsincarn—who know that he is stone, not for profess the right,but for not be the man he profess to be.thi wa the conscious that bulstrod wa wither under while hemad hi prepar for depart from middlemarch, and go to endhi stricken life in that sad refug, the indiffer of new face.the duteou merci constanc of hi wife had deliv him from onedread, but it could not hinder her presenc from be still a tribunalbefor which he shrank from confess and desir advocaci. hisequivoc with himself about the death of raffl had sustain theconcept of an omnisci whom he prai to, yet he had a terrorupon him which would not let him expos them to judgment by a fullconfess to hi wife: the act which he had wash and dilut withinward argument and motiv, and for which it seem compar easyto win invis pardon—what name would she call them by? that sheshould ever silent call hi act murder wa what he could not bear.he felt shroud by her doubt: he got strength to face her from thesens that she could not yet feel warrant in pronounc that worstcondemn on him. some time, perhap—when he wa dy—he would tellher all: in the deep shadow of that time, when she held hi hand in thegath dark, she might listen without recoil from hi touch.perhap: but conceal had been the habit of hi life, and theimpuls to confess had no power against the dread of a deeperhumili.he wa full of timid care for hi wife, not onli becaus he deprecatedani harsh of judgment from her, but becaus he felt a deep distressat the sight of her suffer. she had sent her daughter awai to boardat a school on the coast, that thi crisi might be hidden from them asfar as possibl. set free by their absenc from the intolerablenecess of account for her grief or of behold their frightenedwond, she could live unconstrainedli with the sorrow that wa everydai streak her hair with white and make her eyelid languid.“tell me anyth that you would like to have me do, harriet,”bulstrod had said to her; “i mean with regard to arrang ofproperti. it is my intent not to sell the land i possess in thisneighborhood, but to leav it to you as a safe provis. if you haveani wish on such subject, do not conceal it from me.”a few dai afterward, when she had return from a visit to herbroth’s, she began to speak to her husband on a subject which had forsom time been in her mind.“i _should_ like to do someth for my brother’s famili, nichola; andi think we ar bound to make some amend to rosamond and her husband.walter sai mr. lydgat must leav the town, and hi practic is almostgood for noth, and thei have veri littl left to settl anywherewith. i would rather do without someth for ourselv, to make someamend to my poor brother’s famili.”mr. bulstrod did not wish to go nearer to the fact than in thephras “make some amend;” know that her husband must understandh. he had a particular reason, which she wa not awar of, forwinc under her suggest. he hesit befor he said—“it is not possibl to carri out your wish in the wai you propos, mydear. mr. lydgat ha virtual reject ani further servic from me.he ha return the thousand pound which i lent him. mr. casaubonadvanc him the sum for that purpos. here is hi letter.”the letter seem to cut mr. bulstrod sever. the mention of mr.casaubon’s loan seem a reflect of that public feel which heldit a matter of cours that everi on would avoid a connect with herhusband. she wa silent for some time; and the tear fell on after theother, her chin trembl as she wipe them awai. bulstrod, sittingopposit to her, ach at the sight of that grief-worn face, which twomonth befor had been bright and bloom. it had ag to keep sadcompani with hi own wither featur. urg into some effort atcomfort her, he said—“there is anoth mean, harriet, by which i might do a servic to yourbroth’s famili, if you like to act in it. and it would, i think, bebenefici to you: it would be an advantag wai of manag the landwhich i mean to be your.”she look attent.“garth onc thought of undertak the manag of stone court inord to place your nephew fred there. the stock wa to remain as iti, and thei were to pai a certain share of the profit instead of anordinari rent. that would be a desir begin for the young man,in conjunct with hi employ under garth. would it be asatisfact to you?”“ye, it would,” said mr. bulstrod, with some return of energi. “poorwalt is so cast down; i would try anyth in my power to do him somegood befor i go awai. we have alwai been brother and sister.”“you must make the propos to garth yourself, harriet,” said mr.bulstrod, not like what he had to sai, but desir the end he hadin view, for other reason besid the consol of hi wife. “youmust state to him that the land is virtual your, and that he needhav no transact with me. commun can be made throughstandish. i mention thi, becaus garth gave up be my agent. i canput into your hand a paper which he himself drew up, statingcondit; and you can propos hi renew accept of them. i thinkit is not unlik that he will accept when you propos the thing forth sake of your nephew.”chapter lxxxvi.“le cœur se satur d’amour comm d’un sel divin qui le conserv; de làl’incorrupt adhérenc de ceux qui se sont aimé dè l’aub de lavi, et la fraîcheur de viell amour prolongé. il exist unembaum d’amour. c’est de daphni et chloé que sont fait philémonet bauci. cett vieilless-là, ressembl du soir avecl’auror.”—victor hugo: _l’homm qui rit_.mr. garth, hear caleb enter the passag about tea-time, open theparlor-door and said, “there you ar, caleb. have you had your dinner?”(mr. garth’s meal were much subordin to “busi.”)“oh ye, a good dinner—cold mutton and i don’t know what. where ismari?”“in the garden with letti, i think.”“fred is not come yet?”“no. ar you go out again without take tea, caleb?” said mr.garth, see that her absent-mind husband wa put on again thehat which he had just taken off.“no, no; i’m onli go to mari a minut.”mari wa in a grassi corner of the garden, where there wa a swingloftili hung between two pear-tree. she had a pink kerchief ti overh head, make a littl poke to shade her ey from the levelsunbeam, while she wa give a gloriou swing to letti, who laughedand scream wildli.see her father, mari left the swing and went to meet him, pushingback the pink kerchief and smile afar off at him with the involuntarysmil of love pleasur.“i came to look for you, mari,” said mr. garth. “let us walk about abit.”mari knew quit well that her father had someth particular to sai:hi eyebrow made their pathet angl, and there wa a tender gravityin hi voic: these thing had been sign to her when she wa letti’sage. she put her arm within hi, and thei turn by the row ofnut-tree.“it will be a sad while befor you can be marri, mari,” said herfath, not look at her, but at the end of the stick which he heldin hi other hand.“not a sad while, father—i mean to be merri,” said mari, laughingli. “ihav been singl and merri for four-and-twenti year and more: isuppos it will not be quit as long again as that.” then, after alittl paus, she said, more grave, bend her face befor herfath’s, “if you ar content with fred?”caleb screw up hi mouth and turn hi head asid wise.“now, father, you did prais him last wednesdai. you said he had anuncommon notion of stock, and a good ey for thing.”“did i?” said caleb, rather slyli.“ye, i put it all down, and the date, _anno domini_, and everyth,”said mari. “you like thing to be neatli book. and then hi behaviorto you, father, is realli good; he ha a deep respect for you; and iti imposs to have a better temper than fred ha.”“ay, ay; you want to coax me into think him a fine match.”“no, inde, father. i don’t love him becaus he is a fine match.”“what for, then?”“oh, dear, becaus i have alwai love him. i should never likescold ani on els so well; and that is a point to be thought of ina husband.”“your mind is quit settl, then, mari?” said caleb, return to hisfirst tone. “there’s no other wish come into it sinc thing have beengo on as thei have been of late?” (caleb meant a great deal in thatvagu phrase;) “becaus, better late than never. a woman must not forceh heart—she’ll do a man no good by that.”“my feel have not chang, father,” said mari, calmli. “i shall beconst to fred as long as he is constant to me. i don’t think eitherof us could spare the other, or like ani on els better, howev muchw might admir them. it would make too great a differ to us—likese all the old place alter, and chang the name foreveryth. we must wait for each other a long while; but fred knowsthat.”instead of speak immedi, caleb stood still and screw hisstick on the grassi walk. then he said, with emot in hi voic,“well, i’ve got a bit of new. what do you think of fred go to liveat stone court, and manag the land there?”“how can that ever be, father?” said mari, wonderingli.“he would manag it for hi aunt bulstrod. the poor woman ha been tome beg and prai. she want to do the lad good, and it might be afin thing for him. with save, he might gradual bui the stock, andh ha a turn for farm.”“oh, fred would be so happi! it is too good to believ.”“ah, but mind you,” said caleb, turn hi head warningli, “i musttak it on _my_ shoulder, and be respons, and see aftereveryth; and that will griev your mother a bit, though she mayn’tsai so. fred had need be care.”“perhap it is too much, father,” said mari, check in her joi. “therewould be no happi in bring you ani fresh troubl.”“nai, nai; work is my delight, child, when it doesn’t vex your mother.and then, if you and fred get marri,” here caleb’s voic shook justpercept, “he’ll be steadi and save; and you’ve got your mother’sclever, and mine too, in a woman’s sort of wai; and you’ll keep himin order. he’ll be come by-and-by, so i want to tell you first,becaus i think you’d like to tell _him_ by yourselv. after that, icould talk it well over with him, and we could go into busi and thenatur of thing.”“oh, you dear good father!” cri mari, put her hand round herfath’s neck, while he bent hi head placidli, will to be caress.“i wonder if ani other girl think her father the best man in theworld!”“nonsens, child; you’ll think your husband better.”“imposs,” said mari, relaps into her usual tone; “husband arean inferior class of men, who requir keep in order.”when thei were enter the hous with letti, who had run to join them,mari saw fred at the orchard-gate, and went to meet him.“what fine cloth you wear, you extravag youth!” said mari, as fredstood still and rais hi hat to her with play formal. “you arenot learn economi.”“now that is too bad, mari,” said fred. “just look at the edg ofthes coat-cuff! it is onli by dint of good brush that i lookrespect. i am save up three suit—on for a wed-suit.”“how veri droll you will look!—like a gentleman in an oldfashion-book.”“oh no, thei will keep two year.”“two year! be reason, fred,” said mari, turn to walk. “don’tencourag flatter expect.”“why not? on live on them better than on unflatt on. if wecan’t be marri in two year, the truth will be quit bad enough whenit come.”“i have heard a stori of a young gentleman who onc encouragedflatt expect, and thei did him harm.”“mari, if you’ve got someth discourag to tell me, i shall bolt; ishal go into the hous to mr. garth. i am out of spirit. my father isso cut up—home is not like itself. i can’t bear ani more bad new.”“should you call it bad new to be told that you were to live at stonecourt, and manag the farm, and be remark prudent, and save moneyeveri year till all the stock and furnitur were your own, and you werea distinguish agricultur charact, as mr. borthrop trumbullsai—rather stout, i fear, and with the greek and latin sadlyweath-worn?”“you don’t mean anyth except nonsens, mari?” said fred, coloringslightli nevertheless.“that is what my father ha just told me of as what mai happen, and henev talk nonsens,” said mari, look up at fred now, while hegrasp her hand as thei walk, till it rather hurt her; but she wouldnot complain.“oh, i could be a tremend good fellow then, mari, and we could bemarri directli.”“not so fast, sir; how do you know that i would not rather defer ourmarriag for some year? that would leav you time to misbehav, andthen if i like some on els better, i should have an excus forjilt you.”“prai don’t joke, mari,” said fred, with strong feel. “tell meseri that all thi is true, and that you ar happi becaus ofit—becaus you love me best.”“it is all true, fred, and i am happi becaus of it—becaus i love youbest,” said mari, in a tone of obedi recit.thei linger on the door-step under the steep-roof porch, and fredalmost in a whisper said—“when we were first engag, with the umbrella-ring, mari, you usedto—”the spirit of joi began to laugh more decidedli in mari’s ey, but thefat ben came run to the door with browni yap behind him,and, bounc against them, said—“fred and mari! ar you ever come in?—or mai i eat your cake?”final.everi limit is a begin as well as an end. who can quit youngliv after be long in compani with them, and not desir to knowwhat befel them in their after-year? for the fragment of a life,howev typic, is not the sampl of an even web: promis mai not bekept, and an ardent outset mai be follow by declens; latent powersmai find their long-wait opportun; a past error mai urg a grandretriev.marriag, which ha been the bourn of so mani narr, is still agreat begin, as it wa to adam and ev, who kept their honeymoon ineden, but had their first littl on among the thorn and thistl ofth wilder. it is still the begin of the home epic—the gradualconquest or irremedi loss of that complet union which make theadvanc year a climax, and ag the harvest of sweet memori incommon.some set out, like crusad of old, with a gloriou equip of hopeand enthusiasm and get broken by the wai, want patienc with eachoth and the world.all who have care for fred vinci and mari garth will like to know thatthes two made no such failur, but achiev a solid mutual happi.fred surpris hi neighbor in variou wai. he becam ratherdistinguish in hi side of the counti as a theoret and practicalfarm, and produc a work on the “cultiv of green crop and theeconomi of cattl-feed” which won him high congratul atagricultur meet. in middlemarch admir wa more reserv:most person there were inclin to believ that the merit of fred’sauthorship wa due to hi wife, sinc thei had never expect fredvinci to write on turnip and mangel-wurzel.but when mari wrote a littl book for her boi, call “stori ofgreat men, taken from plutarch,” and had it print and publish bygripp & co., middlemarch, everi on in the town wa will to give thecredit of thi work to fred, observ that he had been to theunivers, “where the ancient were studi,” and might have been aclergyman if he had chosen.in thi wai it wa made clear that middlemarch had never been deceiv,and that there wa no need to prais anybodi for write a book, sinceit wa alwai done by somebodi els.moreov, fred remain unswervingli steadi. some year after hismarriag he told mari that hi happi wa half ow to farebroth,who gave him a strong pull-up at the right moment. i cannot sai that hewa never again misl by hi hope: the yield of crop or theprofit of a cattl sale usual fell below hi estim; and he wasalwai prone to believ that he could make monei by the purchas of ahors which turn out badli—though thi, mari observ, wa of courseth fault of the hors, not of fred’s judgment. he kept hi love ofhorsemanship, but he rare allow himself a dai’s hunt; and whenh did so, it wa remark that he submit to be laugh at forcowardli at the fenc, seem to see mari and the boi sit onth five-bar gate, or show their curli head between hedg andditch.there were three boi: mari wa not discont that she brought forthmen-children onli; and when fred wish to have a girl like her, shesaid, laughingli, “that would be too great a trial to your mother.”mr. vinci in her declin year, and in the diminish lustr of herhousekeep, wa much comfort by her percept that two at least offr’s boi were real vinci, and did not “featur the garth.” butmari secretli rejoic that the youngest of the three wa veri muchwhat her father must have been when he wore a round jacket, and showeda marvel niceti of aim in plai at marbl, or in throw stonesto bring down the mellow pear.ben and letti garth, who were uncl and aunt befor thei were well intheir teen, disput much as to whether nephew or niec were moredesir; ben contend that it wa clear girl were good for lessthan boi, els thei would not be alwai in petticoat, which showedhow littl thei were meant for; whereupon letti, who argu much frombook, got angri in repli that god made coat of skin for both adamand ev alik—also it occur to her that in the east the men too worepetticoat. but thi latter argument, obscur the majesti of theform, wa on too mani, for ben answer contemptu, “the morespoonei thei!” and immedi appeal to hi mother whether boyswer not better than girl. mr. garth pronounc that both were alikenaughti, but that boi were undoubtedli stronger, could run faster, andthrow with more precis to a greater distanc. with thi oracularsent ben wa well satisfi, not mind the naughti; but lettytook it ill, her feel of superior be stronger than hermuscl.fred never becam rich—hi hope had not led him to expect that;but he gradual save enough to becom owner of the stock andfurnitur at stone court, and the work which mr. garth put into hishand carri him in plenti through those “bad time” which ar alwayspres with farmer. mari, in her matronli dai, becam as solid infigur as her mother; but, unlik her, gave the boi littl formalteach, so that mr. garth wa alarm lest thei should never be wellground in grammar and geographi. nevertheless, thei were found quiteforward enough when thei went to school; perhap, becaus thei hadlik noth so well as be with their mother. when fred wa ridinghom on winter even he had a pleasant vision beforehand of thebright hearth in the wainscot parlor, and wa sorri for other men whocould not have mari for their wife; especi for mr. farebroth. “hewa ten time worthier of you than i wa,” fred could now sai to her,magnanim. “to be sure he wa,” mari answer; “and for that reasonh could do better without me. but you—i shudder to think what youwould have been—a curat in debt for hors-hire and cambricpocket-handkerchief!”on inquiri it might possibl be found that fred and mari still inhabitston court—that the creep plant still cast the foam of theirblossom over the fine stone-wall into the field where the walnut-treesstand in state row—and that on sunni dai the two lover who werefirst engag with the umbrella-ring mai be seen in white-hairedplacid at the open window from which mari garth, in the dai of oldpet featherston, had often been order to look out for mr. lydgat.lydgat’s hair never becam white. he di when he wa onli fifti,leav hi wife and children provid for by a heavi insur on hislif. he had gain an excel practic, altern, accord toth season, between london and a continent bath-place; havingwritten a treatis on gout, a diseas which ha a good deal of wealthon it side. hi skill wa reli on by mani pai patient, but healwai regard himself as a failur: he had not done what he oncem to do. hi acquaint thought him enviabl to have so charminga wife, and noth happen to shake their opinion. rosamond nevercommit a second compromis indiscret. she simpli continu tobe mild in her temper, inflex in her judgment, dispos to admonishh husband, and abl to frustrat him by stratagem. as the year wenton he oppos her less and less, whenc rosamond conclud that he hadlearn the valu of her opinion; on the other hand, she had a morethorough convict of hi talent now that he gain a good incom,and instead of the threaten cage in bride street provid on allflow and gild, fit for the bird of paradis that she resembl.in brief, lydgat wa what is call a success man. but he diedprematur of diphtheria, and rosamond afterward marri an elderlyand wealthi physician, who took kindli to her four children. she made averi pretti show with her daughter, drive out in her carriag, andoften spoke of her happi as “a reward”—she did not sai for what,but probabl she meant that it wa a reward for her patienc withtertiu, whose temper never becam faultless, and to the lastoccasion let slip a bitter speech which wa more memor than thesign he made of hi repent. he onc call her hi basil plant;and when she ask for an explan, said that basil wa a plantwhich had flourish wonderfulli on a murder man’s brain. rosamondhad a placid but strong answer to such speech. why then had he chosenh? it wa a piti he had not had mr. ladislaw, whom he wa alwaysprais and place abov her. and thu the convers end withth advantag on rosamond’s side. but it would be unjust not to tell,that she never utter a word in depreci of dorothea, keep inreligi remembr the generos which had come to her aid in thesharpest crisi of her life.dorothea herself had no dream of be prais abov other women,feel that there wa alwai someth better which she might havedon, if she had onli been better and known better. still, she neverrep that she had given up posit and fortun to marri willladislaw, and he would have held it the greatest shame as well assorrow to him if she had repent. thei were bound to each other by alov stronger than ani impuls which could have mar it. no lifewould have been possibl to dorothea which wa not fill with emot,and she had now a life fill also with a benefic activ which shehad not the doubt pain of discov and mark out for herself.will becam an ardent public man, work well in those time whenreform were begun with a young hope of immedi good which hasbeen much check in our dai, and get at last return toparlia by a constitu who paid hi expens. dorothea could havelik noth better, sinc wrong exist, than that her husbandshould be in the thick of a struggl against them, and that she shouldgiv him wife help. mani who knew her, thought it a piti that sosubstant and rare a creatur should have been absorb into the lifeof anoth, and be onli known in a certain circl as a wife and mother.but no on state exactli what els that wa in her power she oughtrath to have done—not even sir jame chettam, who went no furtherthan the neg prescript that she ought not to have marri willladislaw.but thi opinion of hi did not caus a last alien; and the wayin which the famili wa made whole again wa characterist of allconcern. mr. brook could not resist the pleasur of correspondingwith will and dorothea; and on morn when hi pen had beenremark fluent on the prospect of municip reform, it ran off intoan invit to the grang, which, onc written, could not be doneawai with at less cost than the sacrific (hardli to be conceiv) ofth whole valuabl letter. dure the month of thi correspond mr.brook had continu, in hi talk with sir jame chettam, beenpresuppos or hint that the intent of cut off the entailwa still maintain; and the dai on which hi pen gave the daringinvit, he went to freshitt expressli to intim that he had astrong sens than ever of the reason for take that energet stepa a precaut against ani mixtur of low blood in the heir of thebrook.but that morn someth excit had happen at the hall. a letterhad come to celia which made her cry silent as she read it; and whensir jame, unus to see her in tear, ask anxious what wa thematt, she burst out in a wail such as he had never heard from herbefor.“dorothea ha a littl boi. and you will not let me go and see her. andi am sure she want to see me. and she will not know what to do withth babi—she will do wrong thing with it. and thei thought she woulddi. it is veri dread! suppos it had been me and littl arthur, anddodo had been hinder from come to see me! i wish you would be lessunkind, jame!”“good heaven, celia!” said sir jame, much wrought upon, “what do youwish? i will do anyth you like. i will take you to town to-morrow ifyou wish it.” and celia did wish it.it wa after thi that mr. brook came, and meet the baronet in theground, began to chat with him in ignor of the new, which sirjam for some reason did not care to tell him immedi. but whenth entail wa touch on in the usual wai, he said, “my dear sir, iti not for me to dictat to you, but for my part i would let thatalon. i would let thing remain as thei ar.”mr. brook felt so much surpris that he did not at onc find out howmuch he wa reliev by the sens that he wa not expect to doanyth in particular.such be the bent of celia’s heart, it wa inevit that sir jamesshould consent to a reconcili with dorothea and her husband. wherewomen love each other, men learn to smother their mutual dislik. sirjam never like ladislaw, and will alwai prefer to have sirjam’s compani mix with anoth kind: thei were on a foot ofreciproc toler which wa made quit easi onli when dorothea andcelia were present.it becam an understood thing that mr. and mr. ladislaw should pai atleast two visit dure the year to the grang, and there camegradu a small row of cousin at freshitt who enjoi plai withth two cousin visit tipton as much as if the blood of thesecousin had been less dubious mix.mr. brook live to a good old ag, and hi estat wa inherit bydorothea’s son, who might have repres middlemarch, but declin,think that hi opinion had less chanc of be stifl if heremain out of door.sir jame never ceas to regard dorothea’s second marriag as amistak; and inde thi remain the tradit concern it inmiddlemarch, where she wa spoken of to a younger gener as a finegirl who marri a sickli clergyman, old enough to be her father, andin littl more than a year after hi death gave up her estat to marryhi cousin—young enough to have been hi son, with no properti, and notwel-born. those who had not seen anyth of dorothea usual observedthat she could not have been “a nice woman,” els she would not havemarri either the on or the other.certainli those determin act of her life were not ideallybeauti. thei were the mix result of young and nobl impulsestruggl amidst the condit of an imperfect social state, in whichgreat feel will often take the aspect of error, and great faith theaspect of illus. for there is no creatur whose inward be is sostrong that it is not greatli determin by what li outsid it. a newtheresa will hardli have the opportun of reform a conventuallif, ani more than a new antigon will spend her heroic pieti indar all for the sake of a brother’s burial: the medium in whichtheir ardent deed took shape is forev gone. but we insignificantpeopl with our daili word and act ar prepar the live of manydorothea, some of which mai present a far sadder sacrific than thatof the dorothea whose stori we know.her fine touch spirit had still it fine issu, though thei werenot wide visibl. her full natur, like that river of which cyrusbrok the strength, spent itself in channel which had no great name onth earth. but the effect of her be on those around her wasincalcul diffus: for the grow good of the world is partlydepend on unhistor act; and that thing ar not so ill with youand me as thei might have been, is half ow to the number who livedfaithfulli a hidden life, and rest in unvisit tomb.the